International Journal of Construction Management
Building information modelling adoption in
Pamela O. Acheng, Nathan Kibwami, Tom J. Mukasa, Brian B. Odongkara,
Rachel Birungi, Julius Semanda & Musa Manga
To cite this article: Pamela O. Acheng, Nathan Kibwami, Tom J. Mukasa, Brian B. Odongkara,
Rachel Birungi, Julius Semanda & Musa Manga (2023) Building information modelling adoption
in Uganda’s construction industry, International Journal of Construction Management, 23:13,
Submit your article to this journal
Citing articles: 10 View citing articles
Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
Building information modelling adoption in Uganda’s construction industry
Pamela O. Achenga, Nathan Kibwamia, Tom J. Mukasab, Brian B. Odongkaraa, Rachel Birungia, Julius Semandaa
Building Information Modelling (BIM) has gained traction over the last decade seeing several countries Software;technology
making BIM mandatory. Projects using BIM have enjoyed better quality, reduced costs, and duration. adoption;Uganda;virtual
However, its adoption remains low in developing nations like Uganda. This study assessed the state of
vey from 162 registered Architecture, Construction, and Engineering professionals. The analysis applied
statistical tests like One-way non-parametric ANOVA, pairwise post hoc dunn and Mann-Whitney tests to
assess relationships between profession, work experience, role in the supply chain, involvement in aca-
demia, against the awareness, BIM tools used, BIM functions, perceived benefits of BIM, and barriers to
BIM adoption. Enhanced productivity was the highest benefit of BIM, along with complete project infor-
mation and improved design quality. Acquisition and training costs were the top barriers to adoption.
The ANOVAtestshowedthoseinacademiahad better understandingofBIMconcepts, implying academ-
ia’s importance inpromotingBIMwhile work experience influenced BIMfunctions used and awarenessof
1. Introduction adoption of BIM requires understanding the obstacles and strat-
Globally, the construction industry is essential for economic
Uganda is like most African countries regarding adopting
development accounting for over 6–8% of the employed labour
BIM processes and technologies. The rate of innovation and
technology utilisation in most developing countries like Uganda
importance, this industry is fraught with deep-rooted problems,
including inefficient processes, fragmentation leading to delays,
characterised by heavy reliance on labour for productivity, leav-
and inadequate training, amongst others (Hardi and Pittard
ing the employers in a precarious position of employing work
2015; Latham 1994). Processes like Building Information intensification to increase productivity (Calderon et al. 2018,
Modelling (BIM) provide possible solutions to these problems World Bank 1984), which in most cases results in minor
(Azhar et al. 2012; Lee and Borrmann 2020) and have now improvements. In addition, a 2018 report indicated that East
become the ‘gold standard’ of the Construction industry (BIM Africa has the largest number of construction projects in the
Africa 2020; Zhao et al. 2015). continent (Deloitte 2018). Therefore, there is a need for BIM
BIM technology simulates virtual models of a structure, known adoption in Uganda’s construction industry to realise productiv-
as building information models, which are constructed digitally ity gains in the sector. It is becoming a common belief that BIM
containing geometry and data needed to support the fabrication, will improve efficiency by virtually identifying clashes and poten-
construction, and operation activities. BIM, therefore, provides the tial issues during the early stages of the project before physical
potential for more efficient design and construction methods construction, resulting in a reduction in wastage from rework.
(Zhang et al.2018) andgreater integrationoftherolesina project This paper aimed at investigating the status, benefits, and bar-
team. BIM also provides the ability to model the structure’s life- riers of adopting BIM in Uganda’s construction industry, by
cycle. When adopted well, BIM facilitates an integrated design and answering the following questions: (i) what is the level of BIM
construction process resulting in better-quality buildings at lower awareness and use in Uganda? (ii) what are the perceived bene-
costand reduced project duration (Eastmanet al. 2008). fits of using BIM? and (iii) what are the barriers to BIM use in
Recognising the potential benefits, countries like Britain, Uganda’s construction industry?
Singapore, and Finland have made BIM mandatory for public
infrastructure projects (Edirisinghe and London 2015). However, 2. Literature review
adoption of BIM in Africa’s construction industry remains low
(BIM Africa 2020). BIM adoption faces many obstacles like
insufficient training, high execution costs, and low awareness The global construction industry has embraced BIM-based prac-
(BIM Africa 2020; Ogwueleka and Ikediashi 2017). Successful tice, with a general upward trend (McGraw-Hill Construction
2009; Rokooei 2015). However, it is frequently observed that the A BIM model is more than a 3D model. Therefore, by adding
sheer size of the construction sector in populous countries like data dimensions, it is possible to get a fuller understanding of
the United States, China, and India makes the likelihood of the structure, including planning, design, construction, and facil-
widespread acceptance of BIM in the short term difficult and, ity operation processes. The system modifies dimensions when-
therefore, unlikely (Brewer et al. 2012). Therefore, it is posited ever the drafters add specific information to the model. These
that countries with a smaller construction industry such as further applications can deal with various types of information
Finland, Sweden, Norway, Australia, and Canada represent the and data and have led to a reference to terms such as 4D (add-
forefront of BIM software. On the other hand, the construction ing time to the model), 5D (adding quantities and cost of mate-
industry in developing countries in Eastern Europe, the Middle rials), and 6D (adding facilities management/project lifecycle
East, and Africa (presented in Figure 1) are not likely to match management aspects) and so on (Abbasnejad and Moud 2013).
When applied to its full potential; BIM can be used to provide
the pace of adoption as that witnessed in the developed countries
until BIM has become standard practice in the leading regions.
There are no National policies for BIM in any African coun-
try. However, there have been strategies for implementing BIM
in particular projects. In South Africa, Nigeria and Algeria, there
are projects where BIM has been employed for collaboration and Despite all the potential benefits from BIM, its full potential may
design (BIM Africa 2020) and in Ethiopia, there is a plan for a not be realised with limited use (Abbasnejad and Moud 2013).
National BIM policy (Belay et al. 2021). Adopting any new technology requires overcoming barriers and
challenges, some of which are presented in Table 2. Slow pene-
tration of technology is not only attributable to technical aspects
of a novel approach (Babi(cid:1)c and Rebolj 2016), whilst superiority
of a technical solution does not warrant replacing existing solu-
One of the earliest examples of using BIM technology was clash tions. Therefore, a culture and mindset shift should precede an
identification between building elements and the associated overall technological change, confirming that ‘BIM utopia’ and
productivity benefit (Jalaei et al. 2021; Mohandes and Omrany hype framing of BIM benefits have not helped foster its full
2013). Using BIM, an asset can be built twice: once digitally to adoption (Fox 2014; Miettinen and Paavola 2014). Further to
fix all constructability issues and second, physically on-site this, governments need to implement initiatives for BIM adop-
(Drees&Sommer 2020; SPIE 2017). Before the advent of BIM, tion (Faisal Shehzad et al. 2020).
modifying one building element required changing several draw-
ings, which was time-consuming for the designers and drafting
2.4. Methodologies to assess BIM adoption
technicians. BIM does the modifications to all the dependent ele-
ments automatically resulting in time savings. With increasing There have been several studies looking at the implementation of
use of BIM in conceiving, designing, constructing, and operating BIM in the construction industry (Edirisinghe and London 2015;
buildings and other infrastructure, studies have reported the ben- Hamma-Adama and Kouider 2019; Ismail et al. 2017; Burgess
efits of using BIM (refer to Table 1). et al. 2018; Sadeh et al. 2021), the perceived benefits of BIM
(Ahankoob et al. 2019; Azhar et al. 2012; Sacks et al. 2018) and cases, cluster analysis was used to process the data and infer rela-
the barriers to BIM adoption (Ahuja et al. 2020; Faisal Shehzad tionships (Sadeh et al. 2021).
Most of the studies employed survey questionnaires to answer
their research questions (Ahuja et al. 2020; Sadeh et al. 2021; Ma 2.5. Theories of technology adoption
et al. 2020). The analysis of the results used inferential statistics,
descriptive statistics (Ahuja et al. 2020) and hypothesis testing to Technology is a crucial contributor to the growth of the con-
analyse associations between varia-bles (Sadeh et al. 2021) by struction industry through improved productivity, quality, and
either using the Wilcoxon Signed-Rank test (Sadeh et al. 2021), safety (Masood et al. 2014; Sepasgozar and Bernold 2013), none-
Mann-Whitney U test (Sadeh et al. 2021). In addition, in some theless, technology adoption in developing nations is often
Figure 2. Evolution of technology adoption theories (authors’ construct from (Ahuja et al. 2020; Aldhaban 2012; Hillmer 2009; Momani and Jamous 2017;
limited (Alinaitwe et al. 2006; Masood et al. 2014). Furthermore, would be; profession, role in academia, role in the supply chain,
technology adoption is a complex concept that is affected by the and work experience. These independent variables would be
efficiency of the technology and other factors like user character- assessed to identify their relationship or impact on the depend-
istics, management styles, environment, regulation, and other ent variables, which were selected as; understanding of BIM,
causal factors (Ahuja et al. 2020; Sepasgozar and Bernold 2013; BIM functions used, level of awareness and use of BIM tools,
Taherdoost 2018). Several technology-adoption theories have perceived benefits of BIM and perceived barriers to BIM adop-
been developed over the years, focusing on adoption at the indi- tion which were selected from a bibliography review.
vidual or institutional/organisational level, as presented in The instrument included four sections presented in Table 5.
Figure 2. The first section captured the profile information of the respond-
While BIM is a process rather than a technology, its adoption ents. This section included questions with dichotomous answers
in the construction industry hinges on the use of BIM technol- (yes/no) and demographic questions. The second section focused
ogy efficiently to experience the benefits of BIM. Therefore, on understanding of BIM concepts and use of BIM tools. This
under-utilisation of BIM technology may hinder its growth, and section used matrix questions following a Likert scale of 1-5
the complexities of technology adoption may affect the develop- (Jamieson 2004). The third section addressed the respondents’
ment of appropriate solutions. A review of common BIM tech-
perception of the benefits of BIM to construction projects based
nology adoption theories presented in Table 3 demonstrates that
on 13 benefit categories adopted from literature. The final sec-
technology adoption depends on various factors, including user tion assessed the respondent’s perception of the barriers to BIM
interest, cognitive ability, management interest, strategic organ- adoption in Uganda’s construction industry and had 14 barriers
isational interest, technology, and the environment (Ahuja et al.
to BIM adoption obtained from the literature following a Likert
2020; Hillmer 2009; Taherdoost 2018), however with majority of
scholars employing a Technology Acceptance Model (TAM)-
A preliminary questionnaire was piloted for two weeks to
ascertain data validity and reliability. It was then shared with
two construction-industry professionals and four academics to
3. Materials and methods establish content and face validity and minimise double-barreled
questions. Subsequently, the survey questions were modified, and
the survey was refined to capture relevant data. Consequently,
the piloting exercise refined the questions on the benefits of BIM
Following the reviewed literature in Sections 2.4 and 2.5, the the-
and barriers to BIM adoption. The benefits on rework and
oretical model for this research was hinged on the Extended
Technology Acceptance Model (TAM 2) with constructs: under- reduced delays were combined as enhanced productivity. Two
standing BIM concepts, processes and tools; application of BIM; additional barriers on prevalence of unregulated construction
BIM benefits; and barriers to BIM adoption in Uganda’s con- projects and potential conflict of interest amongst project partici-
struction industry. Consequently, the study identified nine varia- pants were also included in the survey.
bles (profession, role in academia, role in the supply chain, work
experience, understanding of BIM, BIM functions used, level of
awareness and use of BIM tools & vendors, perceived benefits of
BIM, and perceived barriers to BIM adoption). Study hypotheses A structured online survey was administered for four months,
were formulated and are presented in Table 4. from February 2020 to May 2020, through SurveyMonkey. The
study population was defined as professionals in the Architecture
Engineering and Construction (AEC) industry registered with a
relevant accrediting or professional body in Uganda. As of
The survey questionnaire was designed to measure nine variables February 2020, the total study population comprised 950 profes-
that would answer the main research question on evaluating the sionals with 525 Registered Engineers, 165 Registered Architects,
status of BIM adoption in Uganda’s construction industry. The 80 Registered Valuation Surveyors, 57 Registered Quantity
research established that the appropriate independent variables Surveyors, and 123 Registered Land Surveyors.
The Professionals falling under the target study population
were contacted via email through their respective accrediting and
professional bodies. The survey was programmed so that
respondents could only take the survey once. Respondents were
categorised according to profession, supply chain role, and work-
ing experience. A further category sought to establish if the
respondents were involved in teaching at higher institutions of
learning to compare the perceptions of those in academia against
practitioners outside the academia. The survey targeted profes-
sionals in the professions of Quantity Surveying, Architecture,
The final survey tool, consent forms, and questionnaires were
prepared and submitted to the Makerere University Research
and Innovation Institutional Review Board for approval, which
provided exemption since the survey was not collecting sensitive
data. However, informed consent was included in the survey
questionnaire indicating the level of data protection.
Electronically signed ‘informed consent’ was obtained from the
respondents before attending the online survey questionnaire. At
the closure of the survey, data were downloaded and exported to
IBM SPSS version17 software for data cleaning, coding, and ana-
lysis. The data analysis was performed in IBM SPSS version 17
The data was analysed according to the flow chart presented in
Responses from individuals outside the target population were
eliminated. These included responses from administrators and
business development officers in the various institutions. The
data cleaning process also eliminated responses where straight
lining occurred, and the respondents selected only one response
3.4.2. Diagnostic tests for multicollinearity
Diagnostics tests were performed to check for multicollinearity
and Normality. The multicollinearity tests were performed using
the Variance of Inflation test for independent variables (VIF) to
ensure that the variables were not closely correlated. The tests
considered that a low correlation exists where the VIF does not
exceed 4 and an acceptable level of correlation for VIF values
3.4.3. Diagnostic tests for normality
The data was checked for normality to determine the best statis-
tical method for analysis. A combination of the Shapiro-wilk test
and a graphical plot of the histogram and normal distribution
curve were applied to check for normality (Masood et al. 2014).
For the Shapiro-wilk test, the p-values greater than 0.05 were
3.4.4. Reliability and validity tests 4. Results
The data was analysed for validity and reliability of the four
measures of understanding BIM concepts, BIM application, the
perceived benefits of BIM, and barriers to BIM adoption. The 4.1.1. Multicollinearity
Cronbach’s alpha (CA) was used to assess the internal consist- The multicollinearity test (refer to Appendix 1) shows that for all
ency of the questionnaire items. A higher alpha (a) value indi- dependent variables, the VIF for the independent variables were
cated higher reliability, with values greater than 0.7 considered within acceptable limits with values less than 4 (O’Brien 2007); and
acceptable (DeVellis 2017). In addition, the Composite reliability theaverageVIF forall theindependent predictors did notexceed a
test was also used to assess the reliability of the questionnaire value of 4 (Hair et al. 1995; Marquaridt 1970; Mason et al. 1989).
items, with acceptable ranges taken to be between 0.70 and 0.95 Therefore, the independent variables did not exhibit multicollinear-
(Fornell and Larcker 1981). ity and consideredas reliable to answer theresearch questions.
Construct validity was checked through Convergent validity
(using Average Variance Extracted) and Discriminant validity
(using Fornell-larcker and cross-loading) (Fornell and Larcker 4.1.2. Normality
1981). The acceptable ranges for average variance extracted were The Shapiro-Wilk test for normality indicated that majority of
those above 0.50 (Fornell and Larcker 1981). the data violates the normality assumptions with p-values less
than 0.05 (refer to Appendix 2) and graphical analysis using his-
tograms and normal distribution curves revealed that all the
3.4.5. Statistical tests and analysis dependent variables followed a non-normal distribution as pre-
The diagnostic tests on normality determined that non-paramet- sented in Figure 4.
ric statistical tests would be most suitable. One-way non-para- Therefore, the data was analysed using non-parametric tests.
metric ANOVA (Hammad et al. 2020; Hosseini et al. 2015) and The dependent variables with binary dichotomous responses
Mann-Whitney tests (Sadeh et al. 2021) were performed to assess were not tested for normality.
the relationships between profession, role in supply chain, work
experience, involvement in education against awareness and use
4.2. Reliability and validity tests
of BIM, understanding of the BIM concepts, BIM functions in
use, level of importance of BIM benefits, and the level of import- 4.2.1. Reliability tests
ance of the BIM barriers. Thereafter, pairwise post-hoc dunn The reliability of the four measures of the level of BIM adoption
tests were performed to establish the statistical significance in Uganda was tested using Cronbach’s alpha (CA) and
between groups within the independent variables; profession, Composite Reliability (CR). The Cronbach’s alpha (CA) for all
role in supply chain, work experience, involvement in education four measures ranged from 0.86 to 0.98, (Table 6) above the
on the determined dependent variables. acceptable level of 0.70 (DeVellis 2017).
The composite reliability (CR) for all four measures was also variance extracted (AVE). The average variance extracted (AVE)
above the acceptable level of 0.60 (Fornell and Larcker 1981), for ‘awareness and use of BIM tools and platforms’ and for
ranging between 0.88 and 0.98 (Table 7) indicating that the ‘Understanding of BIM concepts’ was found to be 67% and 57%,
measures had a high degree of internal reliability. respectively, which is above the acceptable level of 50% (Fornell
and Larcker 1981). However, the AVE for ‘BIM benefits’ and
4.2.2. Validity tests ‘BIM implementation barriers’ were below the acceptable level at
The measures were tested for construct validity and discriminant 41% and 37%, respectively. Fornell and Larcker (1981) posit that
validity. The construct validity was tested using the average since the AVE may be a more conservative method of estimating
AwarenessanduseofBIMtools UnderstandingofBIMconcepts PerceivedbenefitsofBIM PerceivedbarrierstoBIMadoption
validity, an acceptable CR value can warrant a verdict of conver- 4.4. Level of knowledge of BIM concepts, processes
gent validity. Since the CR values for the four measures were and tools
above the acceptable value, the convergent validity was consid-
The One-way non-parametric ANOVA test (Hammad et al.
ered adequate based on the composite reliability (Table 8).
2020; Hosseini et al. 2015) was performed to establish the statis-
The discriminant validity was determined using the Fornell-
tical difference between the groups in the independent variables
larcker criteria and cross-loadings, as demonstrated in Table 9
(Profession, Role in supply chain, and Experience) when com-
and Appendix 3. The comparison of loadings and cross-loadings
pared against the understanding of BIM concepts and awareness
(Appendix 3) shows that the factor loading indicators on the
of BIM software (refer to Appendices 4–6). A pairwise post-hoc
assigned constructs are higher than all loadings of other factor
Dunn test was performed to establish the groups in the inde-
loading indicators. The Fornell-larcker analysis criterion was sat-
pendent variables that possessed the statistical relationships. For
isfied with the square root of the AVE of each construct being
the case of the independent variable, ‘involvement in academia’,
higher than the assigned constructs correlation as demonstrated
the one-way non-parametric ANOVA test was found to be
inappropriate as the variable contained only two categories,
therefore the Mann-Whitney test (Sadeh et al. 2021) was per-
4.3. Profile of respondents formed to assess any statistical significance in the understanding
of BIM concepts and awareness of BIM software.
A total of 950 respondents were identified however, the survey
was only able to contact 671 respondents resulting in a contact
rate of 71%. From the 671 email invitations sent out, 212
responses were received, resulting in a 31.6% response rate. 4.4.1. Level of understanding of BIM concepts
However, only 162 responses were substantially responsive to the The respondent’s profession was found to significantly influence
critical survey questions, which reduced the total response rate their understanding of BIM processes (p¼0.0272). In addition,
to an actual response rate of 24%. The responses that were sub- the involvement in academia demonstrated a strong relationship
stantially responsive were determined as those responses that with one’s knowledge of BIM definitions (p¼0.0121), maturity
had completed the questions on the; (i) profile of the respond- levels (p¼0.0089) and BIM dimensions (p¼0.0229), (refer to
ent, (ii) level of awareness of BIM, (iii) work experience of BIM Appendix 4).
tools and functions,(iv) perceived benefits of BIM and (iv) bar- Pairwise post-hoc comparisons using Dunn’s test indicated
riers to BIM adoption in Uganda’s construction industry. that knowledge of BIM processes was significantly dispersed with
Research by Nulty (2008), considered a response rate between Architects and Geomatic surveyors (p¼0.0166), Civil Engineers
3% and 41% for a population of 1,000 under liberal and stringent and Quantity Surveyors (p¼0.0192), Civil Engineers and
conditions respectively. Therefore, this research considered the Geomatics (p¼0.0051) and Construction Managers and
response rate of 24% reliable (Figure 5). Geomatic surveyors (p¼0.0153).
4.4.2. Level of awareness of BIM tools involvement in academia (p¼0.5448). However, the work
The statistical test presented (refer to Appendix 5) showed a sig- experience showed a strong relationship with the BIM functions
nificant difference in the awareness of ArcGIS, Bentley, CostX, one would use (p¼0.0084).
Masterbill, Revit and Trimble as a BIM software and the six
groups of the respondent’s profession with p-values less than
0.05. It also demonstrated a significant relationship between the 4.6. Perceived benefits of BIM
four groups of the respondent’s role in the supply chain and the
The test revealed statistical significance between the profession
and the perception that BIM ensures early forensic analysis.
addition, the work experience had a significant impact on the
Similarly, involvement in academia influenced the perception
that BIM enhances energy efficiency (refer to Appendix 9).
A further analysis using the dunn test (refer to Appendix 6)
A further analysis using pairwise post-hoc dunn test showed
demonstrated that Geomatics and Valuation Surveyors were more
that the perception that BIM enhances early forensic analysis
aware of ArcGIS as compared to the other professionals while for
was statistically significant amongst Architects and Geomatic
the cost and measurement software (CostX and Masterbill), the
Surveyors (p¼0.044), Architects and Valuation Surveyors
Quantity Surveyors were more aware as compared to the other
professions. In the case of Bentley microstation; Civil Engineers
Quantity and Geomatic Surveyors (p¼0.009), Architects and
and Geomatics Surveyors were aware of this software as a BIM
Geomatic Surveyors (p¼0.044), and Valuation and Geomatic
tool and Geomatics and Valuation Surveyors had more knowledge
of Trimble as compared to other professions. All professions
except forValuation Surveyorswere aware of Revit.
4.7. Perceived barriers to adoption of BIM
4.5. Application of BIM The perceived barrier on interoperability issues showed strong
relationships with the respondent’s role in the supply chain. The
The statistical test (refer to Appendix 7) showed that one’s profes- other perceived barriers did not show statistical significance
amongst the different professions, role in the supply chain, work
sion had a statistical significance on the use of; ArcGIS, Astapower
experience or involvement in academia (refer to Appendix 10). It
was deduced that irrespective of profession, role in the supply
Newforma and Vico. At the same time, involvement in academia
chain, work experience, or involvement in academia, the respond-
These influences were further assessed in Appendix 8 and ents held thesame perception of thebarrierstoBIM adoption.
revealed that except for the Geomatics Surveyors (73%), the use The perception on interoperability issues had a strong rela-
of ArcGIS amongst the professions is low. In addition, all profes- tionship amongst the Consultant and Contractor (p¼0.001),
sions use AutoCAD except for Architects recording a 37.5% use. Client and Contractor (p¼0.002), and Facilities Manager and
On the other hand, Astapower project was not used by any of Contractor (p¼0.032).
the professions aside from the Geomatics Surveyors (10%) and
5.1. Level of knowledge of BIM concepts, processes
A One-way non-parametric ANOVA analysis established that the
BIM functions used by the industry practitioners showed no stat- 5.1.1. Understanding of BIM concepts
istical significance amongst the different groups of professions The study sought to answer the hypothesis on the level of BIM
(p¼0.234), role in the supply chain (p¼0.4492), and; adoption in Uganda by assessing the respondents’ level of
understanding of BIM concepts and their awareness of BIM tools knowledge on BIM processes than the other professionals with a
and vendors. As demonstrated in Figure 6, the survey established weightedaverageof2.31,aspresentedinFigure7(A).Itcanthere-
that most respondents (71.9%) have limited-to-no knowledge of fore be deduced that the respondents’ profession has a correlation
the concept and processes of BIM. The results further indicate with one’s knowledge of BIM processes, concepts and tools since
that while BIM knowledge is still limited, respondents are famil- some professionshavebegun to embraceBIMata greater level.
iar with the BIM definitions, software vendors, and the concept These findings are contrary to previous studies where
of BIM dimensions. Further to this, the analysis demonstrated Architects and Civil Engineers were found to have better know-
that the industry practitioners have limited knowledge of the ledge of BIM (Alufohai 2012). These differences could be attrib-
requirements of a project information model, which are some of uted to the exclusion of Geomatic Surveyors in previous surveys
the essential aspects of applying BIM. This research demonstrates as well as increased exposure to BIM processes in their work due
the need for BIM training to enhance the knowledge of BIM to the accelerated adoption of digital technologies like the use of
processes for improved delivery of construction projects. The Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs) and Geographical
respondents were aware of the BIM tools with limited knowledge Information Systems (GIS), in current surveying practice.
of the BIM processes and concepts. Since BIM is more than the Further analysis in Figure 7(B) revealed that those involved in
technology, for the industry to fully experience the benefits of academia have better knowledge of BIM definitions, maturity levels,
BIM, it is imperative that the industry’s understanding of BIM and dimensions, perhaps because universities are now developing
5.1.2. Relationship between profession and academia on the
understanding of BIM 5.1.3. Awareness of BIM tools
An analysis of knowledge of BIM processes amongst the different The analysis on the awareness of BIM tools presented in Figure
professions demonstrates that Geomatics Surveyors possess better 8 demonstrated that professionals in the construction industry in
Uganda are more aware of modelling software, with 95%, 93% and 5.2.2. BIM functions in use
84% showing awareness of AutoCAD, ArchiCAD and Revit, Although BIM tools and software have several functions, only
respectively, implying that modelling software is more prevalent in two out of 15 functions identified, were reported to be in use
use than other aspects of BIM such as collaboration, preconstruc- by over 50% of the respondents. Most respondents use BIM
tion, and measurement. This further substantiates the hypothesis software for creating drawings, (Figure 13) as reported by
thatBIMisemployedinUganda’sconstructionindustryatLevel1. 83% of the respondents, which correlates with at least 67.6%
using modelling software (from Figure 11) while 50% of the
respondents use BIM for site planning. BIM at maturity level
5.1.4. Relationship between profession and awareness of BIM
1 involves the use of modelling and documentation with lim-
Further analysis of the awareness of BIM software across various
ited collaboration between stakeholders (Abbasnejad and
professions as presented in Figure 9 shows that architects, civil
Moud 2013). BIM adoption has been recommended at level 2
engineers, and construction managers are more aware of model-
with collaboration and interoperability (Khosrowshahi and
ling software, with the majority having knowledge of ArchiCAD,
Arayici 2012). From this survey, it can be deduced that
AutoCAD and Revit. However, Geomatics and Valuation sur-
Uganda uses BIM at level 1.
veyors demonstrated awareness in modelling (ArchiCAD,
AutoCAD) and preconstruction software (ArcGIS) while Quantity
Surveyors indicated awareness in modelling (ArchiCAD, 5.3. Perceived BIM benefits
BIM benefits are all highly regarded as important (Figure 14),
This variation could be arising from the nature of work that
with an average weighted rating scale of 3.98 out of a potential
these professions perform in the construction industry, with
maximum scale of 5.0. Like previous studies, the study respond-
Architects, Civil Engineers, Construction Managers and Quantity
ents perceive the most important benefits of BIM as enhanced
Surveyors usually taking up roles as designers, consultants and
productivity, access to complete project information, and an
contractors. However, it was noted that, in as much as the
improved design (Azhar et al. 2012; Brewer et al. 2012; Dodge
Architects, Civil Engineers, Construction Managers and Quantity
Surveyors in most cases take up roles as project managers where
collaboration and review was necessary, their knowledge of col-
The tests showed a strong relationship between the perceived
laboration and preconstruction software was limited.
benefit of early forensic analysis and the profession of the
respondent; and the perception of better marketing and
5.1.5. Relationship between experience level and awareness enhanced energy efficiency as a highly regarded benefit amongst
of BIM those involved in academia. The study found no relationship
A detailed analysis of the impact of work experience as demon- between the perceived benefits and work experience, contrary to
strated in Figures 10(A)–(D) shows that for Asite, ALLPLAN a study by (Ahankoob et al. 2019) that found a strong relation-
and Masterbill, an additional five-year experience has a 4%, 6% ship between the work experience in BIM perception of
and 8% respective positive influence on the level of awareness of BIM benefits.
the software. However, the other software showed a 0(cid:2)2% influ- Whilst the benefits of BIM can be realised across all phases
ence on the level of awareness between the different groups of of a construction project, it is not ambitious to suggest that
Work experience. such benefits can only accrue when the whole project team
Furthermore, the analysis demonstrates that the awareness of uses standard processes and protocols for exchanging infor-
modelling and preconstruction software is not influenced by the mation at critical stages, which requires an entirely different
work experience in the industry. The level of awareness of way of working and procuring assets. This cannot happen
ArchiCAD, AutoCAD, and Revit was outstanding across all with technologies alone and, above all, without a change in
experience groups. At the same time, Bentley, Edificus, Tekla the culture and mindset of the construction industry.
Digital project, Vectorworks was low across all experience
groups. On the other hand, the awareness of preconstruction
software was low for all the experience groups, as presented in
Figure 10(B). This analysis may explain the common BIM tools The survey identified the most highly regarded barriers as; the
in Uganda’s construction industry. lack of sufficient training opportunities and financial con-
straints for upfront costs, as summarised in Figure 15. The
results correlate with findings from other researchers (Abdul
The survey identified and listed 22 possible BIM tools and soft- Rosayuru et al. 2019) and therefore, suggest the need for all
ware and required the respondents to establish their level of industry players to support the integration of BIM in design-
awareness and use of these BIM tools and software. This ing solutions to these challenges.
approach made it possible to establish awareness and usage The One-way non-parametric ANOVA test found a correl-
amongst stakeholders in the construction industry, as presented ation between the role in the supply chain and the perceived bar-
in Figure 11. rier of interoperability issues. A further analysis revealed that the
Apart from ArcGIS, AstaPower project and AutoCAD, there Consultants, Clients and Property/Facility Managers regarded
was no statistical significance between the use of the BIM soft- interoperability issues as an important barrier with a weighted
ware and the profession. As presented in Figure 12, a detailed mean of 3.6, 3.8 and 3.8 respectively while Contractors found
analysis also demonstrated that most professions use modelling interoperability issues not to be an important barrier with a
software like AutoCAD and Revit. weighted mean of 2.6.
Figure 10. (A) variation of awareness of modelling BIM software against work experience; (B) variation of awareness of preconstruction BIM software against work
experience; (C) variation of awareness of collaboration BIM software against work experience; (D) variation of awareness of measurement BIM software against
6. Conclusion This research had some limitations since it focused on profes-
sionals in the Architecture, Engineering, and Construction indus-
BIM adoption in Uganda is at an infancy stage, with most pro-
try and identified the total population as those registered with
fessionals using BIM software primarily for modelling with lim-
the accrediting and professional bodies. This eliminated profes-
ited use of collaboration or preconstruction software. Majority of
sionals who are still at the graduate level or not registered.
the respondents were aware of modelling software especially;
Therefore, future research will need to incorporate the contribu-
tion of unregistered professionals with accrediting and profes-
appreciate the importance of BIM and considered some of its
most important benefits as enhanced productivity, access to com-
Further research will be necessary to establish the possible
plete project information, and an improved design. This presents
strategies for implementing BIM in construction education,
an opportunity for BIM adoption in Uganda.
emphasising the best approaches for the different Architecture,
To enhance the adoption of BIM in Uganda’s construction
industry, our study recommends concerted effort towards the
training of professionals on the concepts, benefits, and use of Disclosure statement
BIM. The respondents cited financial constraints and lack of
training opportunities as the top barriers to BIM adoption in the No potential conflictof interestwas reportedbythe author(s).
industry. A collaborative effort between academia to train BIM
bodies for continued vocational training, and legislative arm of
Government to make BIM mandatory will enhance the incorpor- Data collected for this study are available from the author
ation and adoption of BIM in industry. upon request.
Funding Belay S, Goedert J, Woldesenbet A, Rokooei S. 2021. Enhancing BIM imple-
This project was implemented with support from the Makerere CogentEng.8(1):1886476.
University Research and Innovation Fund under the reference num- BIMAfrica.2020.AfricanBIMReport2020.https://bimafrica.org/reports/.
Brewer G, Gajendran T, Le Goff R. 2012. Building information modelling
(BIM): an introduction and international perspectives. Tasmanian
Burgess G, Jones M, Muir K. 2018. BIM in the UK house building industry:
opportunities and barriers to adoption. Cambridge, UK: University of
Pamela Opio Acheng will be the first author and correspondence
Calderon C, Cantu C, Chuhan-Pole P. 2018. Infrastructure development in
author as she made substantial contributions to the conceptualiza- sub-Saharan Africa: a scorecard (p. 8425). Washington DC. World Bank.
tion, development, and design of the manuscript. She contributed PolicyResearchWorkingPaper.
Clevenger C, Glick S, del Puerto CL. 2012. Interoperable learning leveraging
building information modeling (BIM) in construction education. Int J
and performed the analysis. In addition, Pamela wrote the paper ConstrEducRes8(2):101–118.
and made the necessary revisions arising from the comments raised Deloitte. 2018. Africa construction trends report. Deloitte Africa. [accessed
by the reviewers. Finally, she prepared the proposal that attracted 2020 June 08]. www2.deloitte.com/za/en/pages/energy-and-resources/
Demian P, Walters D. 2014. The advantages of information management
Dr. Nathan Kibwami and Tom Mukasa will be the second authors through building information modelling. Constr Manage Econ. 32(12):
because they assisted in the conceptualization and development of
DeVellis RF. 2017. Scale development theory and applications. 4th ed.
the manuscript; including, a review of the data analysis tools and
results from the analysis. Further to this, they reviewed the draft DodgeData andAnalytics. 2015.Measuring theImpactof BIMonComplex
Drees&Sommer. 2020. Build it twice first digitally, then physically. [accessed
Billy Brian Odongkara, Semanda Julius, and Birungi Rachel will be 2020 May 18]. https://www.dreso.com/en/press/press-releases/2013/
the third authors as they participated in the data collection, analysis, 07102013-build-it-twice-first-digitally-then-physically/.
Eastman C, Teicholz P, Sacks R, Liston K. 2008. BIM handbook: a guide to
Dr. Manga Musa will be the last and correspondence author as he andcontractors.NewJersey:JohnWiley&Sons,Inc.
Edirisinghe R, London K. 2015. Comparative analysis of international and
participated in data analysis, interpretation, and review of the find-
national level BIM standardization efforts and BIM adoption. In
ings. He offered substantial support in the development of the final Proceedingsofthe32ndCIBW78Conference;October201;p.149–158.
revised manuscriptandco-wrotethe paper. Elshafey A, Saar CC, Aminudin EB, Gheisari M, Usmani A. 2020.
Technology acceptance model for Augmented Reality and Building
Information Modeling integration in the construction industry. J Inf
Abbasnejad B, Moud HI. 2013. BIM and basic challenges associated with its 2020. Recent developments of BIM adoption based on categorization,
definitions, interpretations and expectations. Int J Eng Res Appl. 3(2): identification and factors: a systematic literature review. Int J Constr
Abdul QS. 2016. Adoption of building information modeling in developing Fornell C, Larcker DF. 1981. Evaluating structural equation models with
countries: a phenomenological perspective [dissertation]. Colorado State
Fox S. 2014. Getting real about BIM critical realist descriptions as multiple
Ahankoob A, Manley K, Abbasnejad B. 2019. The role of contractors’ build- GardeziSS,ShafiqN,NuruddinMF,FarhanSA,UmarUA.2014.Challenges
Hair JFJ, Anderson RE, Tatham RL, Black WC. 1995. Multivariate data ana-
BIM adoption in emerging markets – the case of India. Int J Constr lysis.3rded.NewYork:Macmillan.
Manage.20(1):65–76. Hamma-Adama M, Kouider T. 2019. Comparative analysis of BIM adoption
efforts by developed countries as precedent for new adopter countries.
Aldhaban F. 2012. Exploring the adoption of smartphone technology: litera- CJAST.36(2):1–15.
Hammad DB, Rishi AG, Yaduma PS, Kunya SU, Jidda N, Sodangi M. 2020.
Survey of skills sets for the implementation building information model-
ing in construction education body of knowledge in Nigeria. In
isation in construction – a case of Uganda. J Civ Eng and Mgt. 12(3):
2020Second International Sustainability and Resilience Conference:
Alufohai J. 2012. Adoption of building information modelling and Nigeria’s
quest for project cost management. In: FIG working week. knowing to
of the benefits, challenges and key drivers in bim implementation within
manage the territory, protect the environment, evaluate the cultural heri- the UK construction industry. J Build Surv Appraisal Valuat. 3(4):
Amin KF, Abanda FH. 2019. Building Information Modelling plan of work Hartmann T, Fischer M. 2008. Applications of BIM and hurdles for wide-
for managing construction projects in Egypt. J Constr Develop Count. 24 spread adoption of BIM. 2007 AISC-ACCL eConstruction Roundtable
Azhar S, Khalfan M, Maqsood T. 2012. Building information modeling Hillmer U. 2009. Existing theories considering technology adoption. In:
Barison MB, Santos ET. 2010. Review and analysis of current strategies for Hooper M. 2015. BIM standardisation efforts - the case of Sweden. J Info
planning a BIM curriculum. In: Proceedings of the CIB W78 2010: 27th TechConstr.20:332–346.
International Conference 2010 Nov 16. Blacksburg Virginia: Cairo. HosseiniMR,AzariE,TivendaleL,ChilesheN.2015.Barrierstoadoptionof
VirginiaTech;p.16–18. building information modeling (BIM) in Iran: preliminary results. In 6th
International Conference on Engineering, Project, and Production OgwuelekaAC,IkediashiDI.2017.ThefutureofBIMtechnologiesinAfrica:
Management(EPPM2015),GoldCoast,Australia. prospects and challenges. In: Pu W, Li H, Wang X, editors. Integrated
Ismail NAA, Chiozzi M, Drogemuller R. 2017. An overview of BIM uptake building information modelling. Sharjah, UAE: Bentham Science
JalaeiF,ZoghiM,KhoshandA.2021.Lifecycleenvironmentalimpactassess- Okakpu A, Ghaffarianhoseini A, Tookey J, Haar J, Ghaffarianhoseini A,
mentto manageandoptimiseconstructionwasteusingbuildinginforma- Rehman AU. 2020. Risk factors that influence adoption of Building
Khosrowshahi F, Arayici Y. 2012. Roadmap for implementation of BIM in ects:stakeholders’perceptions.IntJConstrManage.1–13.https://doi.org/
KurulE,AbandaH,TahJ,CheungF.2013.Rethinkingthebuildprocessfor Olawumi TO, Chan DWM. 2019. Building information modelling and pro-
BIM adoption. In CIB World Building Congress Construction and ject information management framework for construction projects. J Civ
Latham M. 1994. Constructing the team. Joint review of procurement and Paik SM, Leviakangas P, Choi J. 2020. Making most of BIM in design: ana-
contractual arrangements in the United Kingdom construction industry. lysis of the importanceof design coordination. IntJ Constr Manage. 1–9.
Lee G, Borrmann A. 2020. BIM policy and management. Constr Mgt Econ. Raouf AM, Al-Ghamdi SG. 2019. Building Information Modelling and green
Lee SK, An HK, Yu JH. 2012. An extension of the technology acceptance Rhodes C. 2019. House of commons library construction industry: statistics
model for BIM-based FM. In: Construction research congress 2012: con- andpolicy.
LeeS,YuJ,JeongD.2015.BIMacceptance modelin constructionorganiza- Rokooei S. 2015. Building information modeling in project management:
Liu D, Lu W, Niu Y. 2018. Extended technology-acceptance model to make Rosayuru HD, Waidyasekara KG, Wijewickrama MK. 2019. Sustainable BIM
smart construction systems successful. J Constr Eng Manage. 144(6): based integrated project delivery system for construction industry in Sri
ment.Routledge. Sacks R, Eastman C, Lee G, Teicholz P. 2018. BIM handbook: a guide to
MaX,DarkoA,ChanAP,WangR,ZhangB.2020.Anempiricalanalysisof building information modeling for owners, designers, engineers, contrac-
struction projects: evidence from the Chinese context. Int J Constr Sadeh H, Mirarchi C, Shahbodaghlou F, Pavan A. 2021. BIM feasibility
Manage.5:1–9. for small and medium-sized contractors and subcontractors. Int J
Mason RL, Gunst RF, Hess JL. 1989. Designs and analyses for fitting nology adoption in construction. In ICSDEC 2012: Developing the
response surfaces. In: Statistic design and analysis of experiments: with Frontier of Sustainable Design, Engineering, and Construction 2013;
applications to engineering and science. 2nd ed. NJ: John Wiley & Sons; p.654–666.
p.568–606. Shimonti P. 2018. BIM adoption around the world: how good are we.
Masood R, Kharal MK, Nasir AR. 2014. Is BIM adoption advantageous for [accessed 28 May 2020] https://www.geospatialworld.net/article/bim-adop-
McGraw-Hill Construction. 2009. The business value of BIM: getting build- Sorce J, Issa RR. 2021. Extended Technology Acceptance Model (TAM) for
ing information modeling to the bottom line. [accessed 2020 Oct 16]. adoption of Information and Communications Technology (ICT) in the
https://www.icn-solutions.nl/pdf/bim_construction.pdf. US Construction Industry. J Inform Technol Constr (ITcon). 26(13):
Miettinen R, Paavola S. 2014. Beyond the BIM utopia: approaches to the 227–248.
development and implementation of building information modeling. SPIE. 2017. BIM: building twice is more efficient. Presentation of SPIE
AutomationConstru.43:84–91. GmbH on digital models at the VDI symposium. https://www.spie.com/
Migilinskas D, Popov V, Juocevicius V, Ustinovichius L. 2013. The benefits, en/bim-building-twice-more-efficient.
obstacles and problems of practical BIM implementation. Procedia Eng. Suermann PC. 2009. Evaluating the impact of Building Information
tion industry: review paper. In International Conference of Seminar andtheories.ProcediaManuf.22:960–967.
ries.IntJContempCompRes(IJCCR).1(1):51–58. UBOS. 2020. 17 National Labour Force Survey 2016/17. Uganda Bureau of
tractorsinAuckland.UnitecNewZealand. United BIM. 2020. Leading countries with BIM adoption. United BIM.
Newton K, Chileshe N. 2012. Awareness, usage and benefits of building WorldBank.1984.Issuesandstrategiesindevelopingcountries.Washington
information modelling (BIM) adoption–the case of the South Australian DC: International Bank for Reconstruction and Development: The World
construction organisations. In Proceedings of the 28th Annual ARCOM Bank.
Conference, Edinburgh: Association of Researchers in Construction Zhang X,AzharS,Nadeem A,Khalfan M.2018.Usingbuildinginformation
Management;p.3–12. modelling to achieve lean principles by improving efficiency of work
O’BrienRM.2007.Acautionregardingrulesofthumbforvarianceinflation tive construction skills through BIM-integrated learning environment. Int
Dependentvariable Profession Roleinsupplychain Experience Academia Average
Dependentvariable Profession Roleinsupplychain Experience Academia Average
Variable W p-value Variable W p-value
Variable W p-value Variable W p-value
Variable Profession Roleinsupplychain Experience Academia
Variable Profession Roleinsupplychain Experience Academia
BIMsoftware Profession Role Experience
Dependentvariable Profession Roleinsupplychain Experience Academia
Variable Profession Roleinsupplychain Experience Academia
Dependentvariable Profession Roleinsupplychain Experience Academia
TITLE 24, PART 6, AND ASSOCIATED
2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards
2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards Page iii
This page intentionally left blank.
Page iv 2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards
The Building Energy Efficiency Standards (Energy Standards) were first adopted and put into effect in
1978 and have been updated periodically in the intervening years. The Energy Standards are a unique
California asset that have placed the State on the forefront of energy efficiency, sustainability, energy
independence, and climate change issues, and have provided a template for national standards within
the United States as well as for other countries around the globe. They have benefitted from the
conscientious involvement and enduring commitment to the public good of many persons and
organizations along the way. The 2019 Energy Standards development and adoption process continues
a long-standing practice of maintaining the Standards with technical rigor, challenging but achievable
design and construction practices, public engagement, and full consideration of the views of
2019 is a major step towards meeting the Zero Net Energy (ZNE) goal by the year 2020 and is the last
of three updates to move California toward achieving that goal.
The 2019 Energy Standards revision and the supporting documents were conceptualized, evaluated and
justified through the excellent work of Energy Commission staff and consultants working under contract
to the Energy Commission, supported by the utility-organized Codes and Standards Enhancement
(CASE) Initiative, and shaped by the participation of over 150 stakeholders and the contribution of over
We would like to acknowledge Commissioner Andrew McAllister and his adviser, Martha Brooks, P.E.
for their unwavering leadership throughout the standards development. Payam Bozorgchami, P.E., who
served as the project manager and senior engineer; Bill Pennington, Special Advisor to the Efficiency
Division, who provided overall guidance and contributed to the technical content of the Standards
documents; Mazi Shirakh, P.E., who served as the senior engineer and senior technical lead for solar
photovoltaic standards; Christopher Meyer, who served as the Manager for the Buildings Standards
Office; Peter Strait, who served as the supervisor for the Standards Development Unit; Todd Ferris, who
served as the supervisor for the Standards Tools Unit, Rebecca Westmore, Matt Chalmers, Jacqueline
Moore and Galen Lemei, who provided legal counsel; and technical staff contributors of the Building
Standards office including Mark Alatorre, P.E.;; Courtney Jones; Larry Froess, P.E.; Simon Lee P.E; Jeff
Miller, P.E; Ronald Balneg; Adrian Ownby; Dee Anne Ross; Michael Shewmaker; Alexis Smith; Danny
Tam; Gabriel Taylor, P.E.;. RJ Wichert; Thao Chau; Ingrid Neumann; The Standards Outreach and
Education Unit under the supervision of Christopher Olvera; Andrea Bailey; Amie Brousseau; Paula
David; Kelly Morairty; Javier Perez; Daniel Wong, P.E. The Standards Compliance Office, Joe Loyer;
Rashid Mir, P.E; Lea Haro who served as the supervisor of the Compliance and Enforcement Unit; Judy
Roberson Veronica Olvera; and Tav Commins; Energy Commission editors office managed by Sandy
Louey and including Carol Robinson; Amber Beck; Albert Lundeen; Lana McAllister; Edward Ortiz; and
Michael Ward, and the Energy Commission Hotline staff and Web Team.
Key Energy Commission and CASE consultants included NORESCO, Bruce Wilcox, Benya Lighting
Design, Frontier Energy, McHugh Energy, Energy Solutions. The CASE Initiative is supported by a
consortium of California utility providers which includes the Pacific Gas and Electric Company, Southern
California Edison Company, San Diego Gas and Electric Company, Southern California Gas Company,
the Sacramento Metropolitan Utility District, and the Los Angeles Department of Water and Power.
We would also like to acknowledge the California Energy Alliance for the submission of their code
change proposal relating to lighting in existing buildings.
2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards Page v
The Building Energy Efficiency Standards were first adopted in 1976 and have been updated
periodically since then as directed by statute. In 1975 the Department of Housing and Community
Development adopted rudimentary energy conservation standards under their State Housing Law
authority that were a precursor to the first generation of the Standards. However, the Warren-Alquist
Act was passed one year earlier with explicit direction to the Energy Commission (formally titled the
State Energy Resources Conservation and Development Commission) to adopt and implement the
Standards. The Energy Commission’s statute created separate authority and specific direction
regarding what the Standards are to address, what criteria are to be met in developing the Standards,
and what implementation tools, aids, and technical assistance are to be provided.
The Standards contain energy and water efficiency requirements (and indoor air quality requirements)
for newly constructed buildings, additions to existing buildings, and alterations to existing buildings.
Public Resources Code Sections 25402 subdivisions (a)-(b) and 25402.1 emphasize the importance
of building design and construction flexibility by requiring the Energy Commission to establish
performance standards, in the form of an “energy budget” in terms of the energy consumption per
square foot of floor space. For this reason, the Standards include both a prescriptive option, allowing
builders to comply by using methods known to be efficient, and a performance option, allowing
builders complete freedom in their designs provided the building achieves the same overall efficiency
as an equivalent building using the prescriptive option. Reference Appendices are adopted along with
the Standards that contain data and other information that helps builders comply with the Standards.
The 2019 update to the Building Energy Efficiency Standards focuses on several key areas to improve
the energy efficiency of newly constructed buildings and additions and alterations to existing buildings.
The most significant efficiency improvements to the residential Standards include the introduction of
photovoltaic into the prescriptive package, improvements for attics, walls, water heating, and lighting.
The most significant efficiency improvements to the nonresidential Standards include alignment with
the ASHRAE 90.1 2017 national standards. The 2019 Standards also include changes made
throughout all of its sections to improve the clarity, consistency, and readability of the regulatory
Public Resources Code Section 25402.1 also requires the Energy Commission to support the
performance standards with compliance tools for builders and building designers. The Alternative
Calculation Method (ACM) Approval Manual adopted by regulation as an appendix of the Standards
establishes requirements for input, output and calculational uniformity in the computer programs used
to demonstrate compliance with the Standards. From this, the Energy Commission develops and
makes publicly available free, public domain building modeling software in order to enable compliance
based on modeling of building efficiency and performance. The ACM Approval Manual also includes
provisions for private firms seeking to develop compliance software for approval by the Energy
Commission, which further encourages flexibility and innovation.
The Standards are conceptually divided into three basic sets. First, there is a basic set of mandatory
requirements that apply to all buildings. Second, there is a set of performance standards – the energy
budgets – that vary by climate zone (of which there are 16 in California) and building type; thus the
Standards are tailored to local conditions, and provide flexibility in how energy efficiency in buildings
can be achieved. Finally, the third set constitutes an alternative to the performance standards, which
is a set of prescriptive packages that provide a recipe or a checklist compliance approach.
Page vi 2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards
California Energy Commission Mandatory Envelope Insulation
California Building Code Prescriptive HVAC
California Building Energy Performance Building Commissioning
Time Dependent Process Load
Title 24, Part 6 Valuation Refrigeration
2016 Building Energy Efficiency TDV Data Center
Ducts in Conditioned Spaces Exhaust
Residential High Performance Attics Compressed Air
Nonresidential High Performance Walls Acceptance Testing
Newly Constructed High Efficacy Lighting Data Collection
Additions and Alterations to Water Heating Cool Roof
2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards Page vii
10-103 – PERMIT, CERTIFICATE, INFORMATIONAL, AND ENFORCEMENT REQUIREMENTS FOR
10-103.1 – NONRESIDENTIAL LIGHTING CONTROLS ACCEPTANCE TEST TRAINING AND
10-103.2 – NONRESIDENTIAL MECHANICAL ACCEPTANCE TEST TRAINING AND CERTIFICATION .. 21
10-109 – COMPLIANCE SOFTWARE, ALTERNATIVE COMPONENT PACKAGES, EXCEPTIONAL
METHODS, DATA REGISTRIES AND RELATED EXTERNAL DIGITAL DATA SOURCES, ALTERNATIVE
RESIDENTIAL FIELD VERIFICATION PROTOCOLS, ELECTRONIC DOCUMENT REPOSITORIES, AND
10-110 – PROCEDURES FOR CONSIDERATION OF APPLICATIONS UNDER SECTIONS 10-104,10-106,
10-111 – CERTIFICATION AND LABELING OF FENESTRATION PRODUCT AND EXTERIOR DOOR U-
FACTORS, SOLAR HEAT GAIN COEFFICIENTS, VISIBLE TRANSMITTANCE AND AIR LEAKAGE ........ 36
10-113 – RATING AND LABELING OF ROOFING PRODUCT REFLECTANCE AND EMITTANCE ............. 40
10-114 – DETERMINATION OF OUTDOOR LIGHTING ZONES AND ADMINISTRATIVE RULES FOR
10-115 – COMMUNITY SHARED SOLAR ELECTRIC GENERATION SYSTEM OR COMMUNITY SHARED
BATTERY STORAGE SYSTEM COMPLIANCE OPTION FOR ONSITE SOLAR ELECTRIC GENERATION
SUBCHAPTER 2 ALL OCCUPANCIES—MANDATORY REQUIREMENTS FOR THE MANUFACTURE,
CONSTRUCTION AND INSTALLATION OF SYSTEMS, EQUIPMENT AND BUILDING COMPONENTS 92
SECTION 110.2 – MANDATORY REQUIREMENTS FOR SPACE-CONDITIONING EQUIPMENT ................ 95
Page viii 2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards
SECTION 110.3 – MANDATORY REQUIREMENTS FOR SERVICE WATER-HEATING SYSTEMS AND
SECTION 110.4 – MANDATORY REQUIREMENTS FOR POOL AND SPA SYSTEMS AND EQUIPMENT 113
SECTION 110.5 – NATURAL GAS CENTRAL FURNACES, COOKING EQUIPMENT, POOL AND SPA
SECTION 110.6 – MANDATORY REQUIREMENTS FOR FENESTRATION PRODUCTS AND EXTERIOR
SECTION 110.8 – MANDATORY REQUIREMENTS FOR INSULATION, ROOFING PRODUCTS AND
SECTION 110.11 – MANDATORY REQUIREMENTS FOR ELECTRICAL POWER DISTRIBUTION
SECTION 120.4 – REQUIREMENTS FOR AIR DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM DUCTS AND PLENUMS ............168
OCCUPANCIES—MANDATORY REQUIREMENTS FOR LIGHTING SYSTEMS AND EQUIPMENT, AND
SECTION 130.0 – LIGHTING SYSTEMS AND EQUIPMENT, AND ELECTRICAL POWER DISTRIBUTION
SECTION 130.4 –LIGHTING CONTROL ACCEPTANCE AND INSTALLATION CERTIFICATE
OCCUPANCIES—PERFORMANCE AND PRESCRIPTIVE COMPLIANCE APPROACHES FOR
2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards Page ix
SECTION 140.4 – PRESCRIPTIVE REQUIREMENTS FOR SPACE CONDITIONING SYSTEMS .................. 218
SECTION 140.5 – PRESCRIPTIVE REQUIREMENTS FOR SERVICE WATER HEATING SYSTEMS .......... 230
SECTION 141.0 – ADDITIONS, ALTERATIONS, AND REPAIRS TO EXISTING NONRESIDENTIAL, HIGH-
RISE RESIDENTIAL, AND HOTEL/MOTEL BUILDINGS, TO EXISTING OUTDOOR LIGHTING, AND TO
SECTION 141.1 – REQUIREMENTS FOR COVERED PROCESSES IN ADDITIONS, ALTERATIONS TO
EXISTING NONRESIDENTIAL, HIGH-RISE RESIDENTIAL, AND HOTEL/MOTEL BUILDINGS ............... 269
SUBCHAPTER 7 LOW-RISE RESIDENTIAL BUILDINGS – MANDATORY FEATURES AND
SUBCHAPTER 8 LOW-RISE RESIDENTIAL BUILDINGS - PERFORMANCE AND PRESCRIPTIVE
SECTION 150.1 – PERFORMANCE AND PRESCRIPTIVE COMPLIANCE APPROACHES FOR LOW-RISE
SUBCHAPTER 9 LOW-RISE RESIDENTIAL BUILDINGS - ADDITIONS AND ALTERATIONS TO
SECTION 150.2 – ENERGY EFFICIENCY STANDARDS FOR ADDITIONS AND ALTERATIONS TO
CALIFORNIA MECHANICAL CODE, CALIFORNIA CODE OF REGULATIONS, TITLE 24, PART4
APPENDIX 1-B ENERGY COMMISSION DOCUMENTS INCORPORATED BY REFERENCE IN THEIR
Page x 2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards
2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards
Page 2 2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards
2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards Page 3
ARTICLE 1 – ENERGY BUILDING REGULATIONS
(a) This article contains administrative regulations relating to the energy building regulations in Title 24, Part 6. This
article applies to all residential and nonresidential buildings.
(b) Nothing in this article lessens any necessary qualifications or responsibilities of licensed or registered building
professionals or other designers or builders, or the duties of enforcement agencies that exist under state or local
(c) If any provision of the regulations in this article or the Building Energy Efficiency Standards, Title 24, Part 6, of
the California Code of Regulations is found invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder of these
In this article the following definitions apply:
ACCEPTANCE REQUIREMENTS are "acceptance requirements for code compliance" as defined in Section
ACCEPTANCE TEST TECHNICIAN (ATT) is a Field Technician as defined in Section 10-102 who is
certified by an authorized Acceptance Test Technician Certification Provider to perform acceptance testing of
either lighting controls or mechanical systems pursuant to the requirements of Sections 10-103.1 or 10-103.2,
respectively. ATTs are authorized to perform only those acceptance tests for which they are certified by an
ATTCP; ATTs certified to perform acceptance testing of lighting controls are sometimes referred to as “lighting
control ATTs”, and ATTs certified to perform acceptance testing of mechanical systems are sometimes referred to
as “mechanical ATTs”. (See “Field Technician” and “Acceptance Test Technician Certification Provider”.)
ACCEPTANCE TEST EMPLOYER (ATE) is a person or entity who employs an Acceptance Test Technician
and is certified by an authorized Acceptance Test Technician Certification Provider pursuant to the requirements
of Sections 10-103.1 or 10-103.2. ATEs are authorized to employ only those ATTs for which they are certified by
an ATTCP; ATEs certified to employ ATTs that perform acceptance testing of lighting controls are sometimes
referred to as “lighting control ATEs”, and ATEs certified to employ ATTs that perform acceptance testing of
mechanical systems are sometimes referred to as “mechanical ATEs”. (See “Acceptance Test Technician” and
ACCEPTANCE TEST TECHNICIAN CERTIFICATION PROVIDER (ATTCP) is an agency, organization
or entity approved by the Energy Commission to train, certify and oversee ATTs and ATEs relating to either
lighting controls or mechanical systems according to the requirements of Sections 10-103.1 or 10-103.2,
respectively. ATTCPs are authorized to certify only those ATTs and ATEs for which they are approved by the
Energy Commission; ATTCPs approved to certify ATTs and ATEs relating to the acceptance testing of lighting
controls are sometimes referred to as “lighting control ATTCPs”, and ATTCPs approved to certify ATTs and
ATEs relating to the acceptance testing of mechanical systems are sometimes referred to as “mechanical
ACM means ALTERNATIVE CALCULATION METHOD are compliance software, or alternative component
packages, or exceptional methods approved by the Commission under Section 10-109. ACMs are also referred to
ACM APPROVAL MANUALS are the documents establishing the requirements for Energy Commission
approval of Compliance Software used to demonstrate compliance with the Building Energy Efficiency Standards
for Residential and Nonresidential Buildings currently adopted by the Energy Commission.
Page 4 2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards
ACM REFERENCE MANUAL is the document establishing the procedures required to implement Sections
140.1and 150.1 of Title 24, Part 6 of the California Code of Regulations in Compliance Software.
ADDITIONALITY is a property of solar offsets whereby the offset causes additional benefits beyond what
would occur as a result of all other actions, and which would exclusively benefit the building or property for
which the offset substitutes for compliance obligations that would otherwise be required for that building or
property, and those benefits would not ever be transferred to other buildings or property.
ALTERNATIVE COMPONENT PACKAGE is a set of building measures whose aggregate calculated energy
use is less than or equal to the maximum allowed Energy Budget.
APPLIANCE EFFICIENCY REGULATIONS are the regulations in Title 20, Section 1601 et. seq. of the
APPROVED CALCULATION METHOD is compliance software, or alternative component packages, or
exceptional methods approved under Section 10-109.
BUILDING ENERGY EFFICIENCY STANDARDS are those regulations contained in Title 24, Part 6 of the
BUILDING PERMIT is an electrical, plumbing, mechanical, building, or other permit or approval, that is issued
by an enforcement agency, and that authorizes any construction that is subject to Part 6.
CALIFORNIA ENERGY COMMISSION is the California State Energy Resources Conservation and
COMMISSION is the California State Energy Resources Conservation and Development Commission.
COMPLEX MECHANICAL SYSTEM is defined here for the purposes of complying with the Design Phase
Review component of Section 10-103(a)1. Complex Mechanical Systems are systems that include 1) fan systems
each serving multiple thermostatically controlled zones, or 2) built-up air handler systems (non-unitary or
nonpackaged HVAC equipment), or 3) hydronic or steam heating systems, or 4) hydronic cooling systems.
Complex systems are NOT the following: unitary or packaged equipment listed in Tables 110.2-A, 110.2-B,
110.2-C, and 110.2-E, that each serve one zone, or two-pipe, heating only systems serving one or more zones.
COMPLIANCE APPROACH is any one of the allowable methods by which the design and construction of a
building may be demonstrated to be in compliance with Part 6. The compliance approaches are the performance
compliance approach and the prescriptive compliance approach. The requirements for each compliance approach
COMPLIANCE DOCUMENT is any of the documents specified in Section 10-103(a) utilized to demonstrate
compliance with Part 6 (i.e., Certificate of Compliance, Certificate of Installation, Certificate of Acceptance, and
COMPLIANCE SOFTWARE is software that has been approved pursuant to Section 10-109 of Part 1.
CONDITIONED FLOOR AREA is the “conditioned floor area” as defined in Section 100.1(b) of Part 6.
CRRC-1 is the Cool Roof Rating Council document titled “Product Rating Program”.
DATA REGISTRY is a web service with a user interface and database maintained by a Registration Provider
that complies with the applicable requirements in Reference Joint Appendix JA7, with guidance from the Data
Registry Requirements Manual, and provides for registration of residential or nonresidential compliance
documentation used for demonstrating compliance with Part 6.
RESIDENTIAL DATA REGISTRY is a data registry that is maintained by a HERS Provider that provides
for registration, when required by Part 6 of all residential compliance documentation and the nonresidential
NONRESIDENTIAL DATA REGISTRY is a data registry that is maintained by a Registration Provider
approved by the Commission that provides for registration, when required by Part 6 of all nonresidential
compliance documentation. However, nonresidential data registries may not provide for registration of
DATA REGISTRY REQUIREMENTS MANUAL is a document that provides additional detailed guidance
regarding the functional and technical aspects of the data registry requirements given in Joint Appendix JA7.
2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards Page 5
DOCUMENTATION AUTHOR is a person who prepares a Title 24 Part 6 compliance document that must
subsequently be reviewed and signed by a responsible person in order to certify compliance with Part 6.
ENERGY BUDGET is the “energy budget” as defined in Section 100.1(b) of Part 6.
ENERGY COMMISSION is the California State Energy Resources Conservation and Development
ENFORCEMENT AGENCY is the city, county, or state agency responsible for issuing a building permit.
EXCEPTIONAL METHOD is a method for estimating the energy performance of building features that cannot
be adequately modeled using existing Compliance Software and that is approved by the Executive Director.
EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR is the executive director of the Commission.
FIELD TECHNICIAN is a person who performs acceptance tests in accordance with the specifications in
Reference Nonresidential Appendix NA7, and reports the results of the acceptance tests on the Certificate of
Acceptance in accordance with the requirements of Section 10-103(a)4.
HERS is the California Home Energy Rating System as described in Title 20, Chapter 4, Article 8, Section 1670.
HERS PROVIDER is an organization that administers a home energy rating system as described in Title 20,
HERS PROVIDER DATA REGISTRY is a data registry maintained by a HERS provider.
HERS RATER is a person who has been trained, tested, and certified by a HERS Provider to perform the field
verification and diagnostic testing required for demonstrating compliance with the Part 6 as described in Title 20,
HVAC SYSTEM is the “HVAC system” as defined in Section 100.1(b) of Part 6.
MANUFACTURED DEVICE is the “manufactured device” as defined in Section 100.1(b) of Part 6.
NFRC 100 is the National Fenestration Rating Council document titled “NFRC 100: Procedure for Determining
Fenestration Product U-factors.” (2017) NFRC 100 includes procedures for the Component Modeling Approach
(CMA) and site-built fenestration formerly included in a separate document, NFRC 100-SB.
NFRC 200 is the National Fenestration Rating Council document titled “NFRC 200: Procedure for Determining
Fenestration Product Solar Heat Gain Coefficients and Visible Transmittance at Normal Incidence.” (2017),
NFRC 202 is the National Fenestration Rating Council document titled “NFRC 202: Procedures for Determining
Translucent Fenestration Product Visible Transmittance at Normal Incidence.” (2017).
NFRC 203 is the National Fenestration Rating Council document titled “NFRC 203: Procedure for Determining
Visible Transmittance of Tubular Daylighting Devices.” (2017),
NFRC 400 is the National Fenestration Rating Council document titled “NFRC 400: Procedure for Determining
PART 6 is Title 24, Part 6 of the California Code of Regulations.
PUBLIC ADVISER is the Public Adviser of the Commission.
R-VALUE is the measure of the thermal resistance of insulation or any material or building component expressed
RECORD DRAWINGS are drawings that document the as installed location and performance data on all
lighting and space conditioning system components, devices, appliances and equipment, including but not limited
to wiring sequences, control sequences, duct and pipe distribution system layout and sizes, space conditioning
system terminal device layout and airflow rates, hydronic system and flow rates, and connections for the space
conditioning system. Record drawings are sometimes referred to as “as built” drawings.
Page 6 2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards
REFERENCE APPENDICES are the support document for the Building Energy Efficiency Standards and the
ACM Approval Manuals. The document consists of three sections: the Reference Joint Appendices (JA), the
Reference Residential Appendices (RA), and the Reference Nonresidential Appendices (NA) currently adopted by
REFERENCE JOINT APPENDICES are the Reference Joint Appendices currently adopted by the Energy
REFERENCE NONRESIDENTIAL APPENDICES are the Reference Nonresidential Appendices currently
REFERENCE RESIDENTIAL APPENDICES are the Reference Residential Appendices currently adopted by
REGISTERED DOCUMENT is a document that has been submitted to a residential or nonresidential data
registry for retention, and the data registry has assigned a unique registration number to the document.
REGISTRATION PROVIDER is an organization that administers a data registry service that conforms to the
requirements in Reference Joint Appendix JA7.
STANDARD DESIGN BUILDING is a “Standard Design Building” as defined in Section 100.1(b) of Part 6.
2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards Page 7
(a) Documentation. For all buildings other than healthcare facilities, the following documentation is required to
demonstrate compliance with Part 6. This documentation shall meet the requirements of Section 10-103(a) or
alternatives approved by the Executive Director. Healthcare facilities shall instead comply with the applicable
1. Certificate of Compliance. For all buildings, the Certificate of Compliance described in Section 10-103
shall be signed by the person who is eligible under Division 3 of the Business and Professions Code to
accept responsibility for the building design (responsible person); and submitted in accordance with
Sections 10-103(a)1 and 10-103(a)2 to certify conformance with Part 6. If more than one person has
responsibility for the building design, each person shall sign the Certificate of Compliance document(s)
applicable to that portion of the design for which the person is responsible. Alternatively, the person with
chief responsibility for the building design shall prepare and sign the Certificate of Compliance document(s)
for the entire building design. Subject to the requirements of Sections 10-103(a)1 and 10-103(a)2, persons
who prepare Certificate of Compliance documents (documentation authors) shall sign a declaration
statement on the documents they prepare to certify the information provided on the documentation is
accurate and complete. In accordance with applicable requirements of 10-103(a)1, the signatures provided
by responsible persons and documentation authors shall be original signatures on paper documents or
electronic signatures on electronic documents conforming to the electronic signature specifications in
For all Nonresidential buildings, the Design Review Kickoff Certificate(s) of Compliance and the
Construction Document Design Review Checklist Certificate(s) of Compliance shall be reviewed and
signed by a licensed professional engineer or licensed architect, or a licensed contractor representing
services performed by or under the direct supervision of a licensed engineer or architect, as specified in the
provisions of Division 3 of the Business and Professions Code. For buildings less than 10,000 square feet,
this signer may be the engineer or architect of record. For buildings greater than 10,000 square feet but less
than 50,000 square feet, this signer shall be a qualified in-house engineer or architect with no other project
involvement or a third-party engineer, architect, or contractor. For buildings greater than 50,000 square feet
and all buildings with complex mechanical systems serving more than 10,000 square feet, this signer shall
A. All Certificate of Compliance documentation shall conform to a format and informational order and
content approved by the Energy Commission.
i. Identify the energy features, performance specifications, materials, components, and manufactured
devices required for compliance with Part 6.
ii. Identify the building project name and location. The building project name and location
identification on the Certificate of Compliance shall be consistent with the building project name
and location identification given on the other applicable building design plans and specifications
submitted to the enforcement agency for approval with the building permit application.
iii. Display the unique registration number assigned by the data registry if Section 10-103(a)1 requires
iv. Include a declaration statement to the effect that the building energy features, performance
specifications, materials, components, and manufactured devices for the building design identified
on the Certificate of Compliance indicate the building is in compliance with the requirements of
Title 24, Parts 1 and 6, and the building design features identified on the Certificate of Compliance
are consistent with the building design features identified on the other applicable compliance
documents, worksheets, calculations, plans, and specifications submitted to the enforcement
agency for approval with the building permit application.
10-103 – PERMIT, CERTIFICATE, INFORMATIONAL, AND ENFORCEMENT REQUIREMENTS FOR
Page 8 2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards
v. Be signed by the documentation author to certify the documentation is accurate and complete.
When document registration is required by Section 10-103(a)1, the signature shall be an electronic
signature on an electronic document in accordance with the electronic signature specifications in
vi. Be signed by the responsible person eligible under Division 3 of the Business and Professions
Code to accept responsibility for the design to certify conformance with Part 6. When document
registration is required by Section 10-103(a)1, the signature shall be an electronic signature on an
electronic document in accordance with the electronic signature specifications in Reference Joint
B. For all low-rise residential buildings for which compliance requires HERS field verification, the
person(s) responsible for the Certificate(s) of Compliance shall submit the Certificate(s) for registration
and retention to a HERS provider data registry. The submittals to the HERS provider data registry shall
be made electronically in accordance with the specifications in Reference Joint Appendix JA7.
Contingent upon availability and approval of an electronic document repository by the Executive
Director, Certificate of Compliance documents that are registered and retained by a HERS provider
data registry shall also be automatically transmitted by the data registry, to an electronic document
repository for retention in accordance with the specifications in Reference Joint Appendix JA7.
C. For alterations to existing residential buildings for which HERS field verification is not required,
including but not limited to water heater and window replacements, and for additions to existing
residential buildings that are less than 300 square feet for which HERS field verification is not required,
the enforcement agencies may at their discretion not require any Certificate of Compliance
documentation, or may develop simplified Certificate of Compliance documentation for demonstrating
Exemptions from submitting compliance documentation shall not be deemed to grant authorization for
any work to be done in any manner in violation of this code or other provisions of law.
D. Contingent upon approval of data registry(s) by the Commission, all nonresidential buildings, high-rise
residential buildings, and hotels and motels, when designated to allow use of an occupancy group or
type regulated by Part 6 the person(s) responsible for the Certificate(s) of Compliance shall submit the
Certificate(s) for registration and retention to a data registry approved by the Commission. The
submittals to the approved data registry shall be made electronically in accordance with the
specifications in Reference Joint Appendix JA7.
Contingent upon availability and approval of an electronic document repository by the Executive
Director, Certificate of Compliance documents that are registered and retained by an approved data
registry shall also be automatically transmitted by the data registry to an electronic document repository
for retention in accordance with the specifications in Reference Joint Appendix JA7.
2. Application for a building permit. Each application for a building permit subject to Part 6 shall contain at
A. For all newly constructed buildings, additions, alterations, or repairs regulated by Part 6 the applicant
shall submit the applicable Certificate(s) of Compliance to the enforcement agency for approval. The
certificate(s) shall conform to the requirements of Section 10-103(a)1, and shall be approved by the
local enforcement agency, in accordance with all applicable requirements of Section 10-103(d), by
stamp or authorized signature prior to issuance of a building permit. A copy of the Certificate(s) of
Compliance shall be included with the documentation the builder provides to the building owner at
For alterations to existing residential buildings for which HERS field verification is required, and when
the enforcement agency does not require building design plans to be submitted with the application for
a building permit, the applicable Certificate of Compliance documentation specified in Section 10-
103(a)1 is not required to be approved by the enforcement agency prior to issuance of a building
permit, but shall be approved by the enforcement agency prior to final inspection of the dwelling unit,
and shall be made available to the enforcement agency for all applicable inspections, or made available
for viewing on an approved data registry.
10-103 – PERMIT, CERTIFICATE, INFORMATIONAL, AND ENFORCEMENT REQUIREMENTS FOR
2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards Page 9
When the enforcement agency requires building design plans to be submitted with the application for a
building permit, the applicable Certificate of Compliance documents shall be incorporated into the
building design plans. When Section 10-103(a)1 requires document registration, the certificate(s) that
are incorporated into the building design plans shall be copies of the registered Certificate of
Compliance documents from a HERS provider data registry, or a data registry approved by the
B. When the enforcement agency requires building design plans and specifications to be submitted with
the application for a building permit, the plans shall conform to the specifications for the features,
materials, components, and manufactured devices identified on the Certificate(s) of Compliance, and
shall conform to all other applicable requirements of Part 6. Plans and specifications shall be submitted
to the enforcement agency for any other feature, material, component, or manufactured device that Part
6 requires be indicated on the building design plans and specifications. Plans and specifications
submitted with each application for a building permit for Nonresidential buildings, High-rise
Residential buildings and Hotels and Motels shall provide acceptance requirements for code
compliance of each feature, material, component or manufactured device when acceptance
requirements are required under Part 6. Plans and specifications for Nonresidential buildings, High-rise
Residential buildings and Hotels and Motels shall require, and indicate with a prominent note on the
plans, that within 90 days after the Enforcement Agency issues a permanent final occupancy permit,
record drawings be provided to the building owner.
For all buildings, if the specification for a building design feature, material, component, or
manufactured device is changed before final construction or installation, such that the building may no
longer comply with Part 6 the building must be brought back into compliance, and so indicated on
amended plans, specifications, and Certificate(s) of Compliance that shall be submitted to the
enforcement agency for approval. Such characteristics shall include the efficiency (or other
characteristic regulated by Part 6) of each building design feature, material, component, or device.
C. The enforcement agency shall have the authority to require submittal of any supportive documentation
that was used to generate the Certificate(s) of Compliance, including but not limited to the electronic
input file for the compliance software tool that was used to generate performance method Certificate(s)
of Compliance; or any other supportive documentation that is necessary to demonstrate that the
building design conforms to the requirements of Part 6.
3. Certificate of Installation. For all buildings, the person in charge of the construction or installation, who is
eligible under Division 3 of the Business and Professions Code to accept responsibility for the construction
or installation of features, materials, components, or manufactured devices regulated by Part 6 or the
Appliance Efficiency Regulations (responsible person) shall sign and submit Certificate of Installation
documentation as specified in Section 10-103(a)3 to certify conformance with Part 6. If more than one
person has responsibility for the construction or installation, each person shall sign and submit the
Certificate of Installation documentation applicable to the portion of the construction or installation for
which they are responsible; alternatively, the person with chief responsibility for the construction or
installation shall sign and submit the Certificate of Installation documentation for the entire construction or
installation scope of work for the project. Subject to the requirements of Section 10-103(a)3, persons who
prepare Certificate of Installation documentation (documentation authors) shall sign a declaration statement
on the documents they prepare to certify the information provided on the documentation is accurate and
complete. In accordance with applicable requirements of 10-103(a)3, the signatures provided by responsible
persons and documentation authors shall be original signatures on paper documents or electronic signatures
on electronic documents conforming to the electronic signature specifications in Reference Joint Appendix
A. Delegation of Signature Authority. Except where prohibited by law, including but not limited to any
requirements under Division 3 of the Business and Professions Code, the Responsible Person may
delegate signature authority to third parties (Authorized Representatives) provided that there is a written
i. Between the Responsible Person and the person to be designated as the Authorized Representative.
ii. Specifying that the Authorized Representative may sign Certificates of Installation on behalf of the
10-103 – PERMIT, CERTIFICATE, INFORMATIONAL, AND ENFORCEMENT REQUIREMENTS FOR
Page 10 2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards
iii. Specifying that the legal responsibility for construction or installation in the applicable
classification for the scope of work specified on the Certificate of Installation document(s) remains
iv. That is signed by both the Responsible Person and the Authorized Representative.
v. That is retained by the HERS Provider to which all compliance documents are submitted for the
building to which the Certificate of Installation documentation pertains.
vi. That is maintained in the HERS Provider Data Registry such that it is accessible for verification
by, included but not limited to, the Energy Commission and enforcement agencies.
B. Format. All Certificate of Installation documentation shall conform to a format and informational
order and content approved by the Energy Commission.
i. Identify the features, materials, components, manufactured devices, and system performance
diagnostic results required to demonstrate compliance with Part 6 and the Appliance Efficiency
ii. State the number of the building permit under which the construction or installation was
iii Display the unique registration number assigned by the data registry if Section 10-103(a)3 requires
iv. Include a declaration statement indicating that the constructed or installed features, materials,
components or manufactured devices (the installation) identified on the Certificate of Installation
conforms to all applicable codes and regulations, and the installation conforms to the requirements
given on the plans and specifications approved by the enforcement agency.
v. Be signed by the documentation author to certify the documentation is accurate and complete.
When document registration is required by Section 10-103(a)3, the signature shall be an electronic
signature on an electronic document in accordance with the electronic signature specifications in
vi. Be signed by the Responsible Person eligible under Division 3 of the Business and Professions
Code to accept responsibility for construction or installation in the applicable classification for the
scope of work specified on the Certificate of Installation document(s), or shall be signed by their
Authorized Representative. When document registration is required by Section 10-103(a)3, the
signature shall be an electronic signature on an electronic document in accordance with the
electronic signature specifications in Reference Joint Appendix JA7.
C. For all low-rise residential buildings, the person(s) responsible for the Certificate(s) of Installation, or
their Authorized Representative(s), shall submit the following Certificate of Installation documentation
that is applicable to the building to a HERS provider data registry for registration and retention in
accordance with procedures specified in Reference Residential Appendix RA2:
i. All Certificates of Installation for which compliance requires HERS field verification.
ii. All other Certificates of Installation, except those exempted by the Energy Commission.
The submittals to the HERS provider data registry shall be made electronically in accordance with the
specifications in Reference Joint Appendix JA7.
Contingent upon availability and approval of an electronic document repository by the Executive
Director, Certificate of Installation documents that are registered and retained by a HERS provider data
registry shall also be automatically transmitted by the data registry to an electronic document repository
for retention in accordance with the specifications in Reference Joint Appendix JA7.
D. For alterations to existing residential buildings for which HERS field verification is not required,
including but not limited to water heater and window replacements, and for additions to existing
residential buildings that are less than 300 square feet for which HERS field verification is not required,
the enforcement agencies may, at their discretion, not require any Certificate of Installation
10-103 – PERMIT, CERTIFICATE, INFORMATIONAL, AND ENFORCEMENT REQUIREMENTS FOR
2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards Page 11
documentation, or may develop simplified Certificate of Installation documentation for demonstrating
Exemptions from submitting compliance documentation shall not be deemed to grant authorization for
any work to be done in any manner in violation of this code or other provisions of law.
E. Contingent upon approval of data registry(s) by the Commission, all nonresidential buildings, high-rise
residential buildings, and hotels and motels, when designated to allow use of an occupancy group or
type regulated by Part 6 the person(s) responsible for the Certificate(s) of Installation, except those
documents exempted by the Energy Commission, shall submit the Certificate(s) for registration and
retention to a data registry approved by the Commission. The submittals to the approved data registry
shall be made electronically in accordance with the specifications in Reference Joint Appendix JA7.
Contingent upon availability and approval of an electronic document repository by the Executive
Director, Certificate of Installation documents that are registered and retained by an approved data
registry shall also be automatically transmitted by the data registry to an electronic document repository
for retention in accordance with the specifications in Reference Joint Appendix JA7.
F. Availability. For all buildings, a copy of the Certificate(s) of Installation shall be posted, or made
available with the building permit(s) issued for the building, or made available for viewing on an
approved data registry, and shall be made available to the enforcement agency for all applicable
inspections. When document registration is required by Section 10-103(a)3, registered copies of the
Certificate(s) of Installation from a HERS provider data registry or a data registry approved by the
Commission shall be posted or made available with the building permit(s) issued for the building, and
shall be made available to the enforcement agency for all applicable inspections. If construction on any
portion of the building subject to Part 6 will be impossible to inspect because of subsequent
construction, the enforcement agency may require the Certificate(s) of Installation to be posted upon
completion of that portion. A copy of the Certificate(s) of Installation shall be included with the
documentation the builder provides to the building owner at occupancy as specified in Section 10-
4. Certificate of Acceptance. For all nonresidential buildings, high-rise residential buildings, and hotels and
motels, when designated to allow use of an occupancy group or type regulated by Part 6 the person in
charge of the acceptance testing, who is eligible under Division 3 of the Business and Professions Code to
accept responsibility for the applicable scope of system design, or construction, or installation of features,
materials, components, or manufactured devices regulated by Part 6 or the Appliance Efficiency
Regulations (responsible person), shall sign and submit all applicable Certificate of Acceptance
documentation in accordance with Section 10-103(a)4 and Reference Nonresidential Appendix NA7 to
certify conformance with Part 6. If more than one person has responsibility for the acceptance testing, each
person shall sign and submit the Certificate of Acceptance documentation applicable to the portion of the
construction or installation, for which they are responsible; alternatively, the person with chief
responsibility for the system design, construction or installation, shall sign and submit the Certificate of
Acceptance documentation for the entire construction or installation scope of work for the project. Subject
to the requirements of Section 10-103(a)4, persons who prepare Certificate of Acceptance documentation
(documentation authors) shall sign a declaration statement on the documents they prepare to certify the
information provided on the documentation is accurate and complete. Persons who perform acceptance test
procedures in accordance with the specifications in Reference Nonresidential Appendix NA7, and report the
results of the acceptance tests on the Certificate of Acceptance (field technicians) shall sign a declaration
statement on the documents they submit to certify the information provided on the documentation is true
and correct. In accordance with applicable requirements of Section 10-103(a)4, the signatures provided by
responsible persons, field technicians, and documentation authors shall be original signatures on paper
documents or electronic signatures on electronic documents conforming to the electronic signature
specifications in Reference Joint Appendix JA7.
A. All Certificate of Acceptance documentation shall conform to a format and informational order and
content approved by the Energy Commission.
i. Identify the features, materials, components, manufactured devices, and system performance
diagnostic results required to demonstrate compliance with the acceptance requirements to which
10-103 – PERMIT, CERTIFICATE, INFORMATIONAL, AND ENFORCEMENT REQUIREMENTS FOR
Page 12 2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards
the applicant must conform as indicated in the plans and specifications submitted under Section
10-103(a)2, and as specified in Reference Nonresidential Appendix NA7.
ii. State the number of the building permit under which the construction or installation was
iii. Display the unique registration number assigned by the data registry if Section 10-103(a)4 requires
iv. Include a declaration statement indicating that the features, materials, components or manufactured
devices identified on the Certificate of Acceptance conform to the applicable acceptance
requirements as indicated in the plans and specifications submitted under Section 10-103(a), and
with applicable acceptance requirements and procedures specified in the Reference Nonresidential
Appendix NA7, and confirms that Certificate(s) of Installation described in Section 10-103(a)3 has
been completed and is posted or made available with the building permit(s) issued for the building,
or made available for viewing on an approved data registry.
v. Be signed by the documentation author to certify the documentation is accurate and complete.
When document registration is required by Section 10-103(a)4, the signature shall be an electronic
signature on an electronic document in accordance with the electronic signature specifications in
vi. Be signed by the field technician who performed the acceptance test procedures and reported the
results on the Certificate of Acceptance. When document registration is required by Section 10-
103(a)4, the signature shall be an electronic signature on an electronic document in accordance
with the electronic signature specifications in Reference Joint Appendix JA7.
vii. Be signed by the responsible person in charge of the acceptance testing who is eligible under
Division 3 of the Business and Professions Code to accept responsibility for the system design,
construction or installation in the applicable classification for the scope of work identified on the
Certificate of Acceptance, or shall be signed by their authorized representative. When document
registration is required by Section 10-103(a)4, the signature shall be an electronic signature on an
electronic document in accordance with the electronic signature specifications in Reference Joint
B. Contingent upon approval of data registry(s) by the Commission, for all nonresidential buildings, high-
rise residential buildings, and hotels and motels, when designated to allow use of an occupancy group
or type regulated by Part 6 the person(s) responsible for the Certificate(s) of Acceptance shall submit
the Certificate(s) for registration and retention to a data registry approved by the Commission. The
submittals to the approved data registry shall be made electronically in accordance with the
specifications in Reference Joint Appendix JA7.
Contingent upon availability and approval of an electronic document repository by the Executive
Director, Certificate of Acceptance documents that are registered and retained by an approved data
registry shall also be automatically transmitted by the data registry, to an electronic document
repository for retention in accordance with the specifications in Reference Joint Appendix JA7.
C. A copy of the registered Certificate(s) of Acceptance shall be posted, or made available with the
building permit(s) issued for the building, or made available for viewing on an approved data registry,
and shall be made available to the enforcement agency for all applicable inspections. If construction on
any portion of the building subject to Part 6 will be impossible to inspect because of subsequent
construction, the enforcement agency may require the Certificate(s) of Acceptance to be posted upon
completion of that portion. A copy of the Certificate(s) of Acceptance shall be included with the
documentation the builder provides to the building owner at occupancy as specified in Section 10-
5. Certificate of Field Verification and Diagnostic Testing (Certificate of Verification). For all buildings
for which compliance requires HERS field verification, a certified HERS Rater shall conduct all required
HERS field verification and diagnostic testing in accordance with applicable procedures specified in
Reference Appendices RA2, RA3, NA1, and NA2. All applicable Certificate of Verification documentation
shall be completed, signed, and submitted by the certified HERS Rater who performed the field verification
and diagnostic testing services (responsible person) in accordance with the requirements of Section 10-
10-103 – PERMIT, CERTIFICATE, INFORMATIONAL, AND ENFORCEMENT REQUIREMENTS FOR
2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards Page 13
103(a)5, and Reference Appendices RA2, and NA1, to certify conformance with Part 6. If more than one
rater has responsibility for the HERS verification for the building, each rater shall sign and submit the
Certificate of Verification documentation applicable to the portion of the building for which they are
responsible. Subject to the requirements of Section 10-103(a)5, persons who prepare Certificate of
Verification documentation (documentation authors) shall sign a declaration statement on the documents
they prepare to certify the information provided on the documentation is accurate and complete. The
signatures provided by responsible persons and documentation authors shall be electronic signatures on
A Format. All Certificate of Verification documentation shall conform to a format and informational
order and content approved by the Energy Commission.
i. Identify the installed features, materials, components, manufactured devices, or system
performance diagnostic results that require HERS verification for compliance with Part 6 as
specified on the Certificate(s) of Compliance for the building.
ii. State the number of the building permit under which the construction or installation was
iii. Display the unique registration number assigned by the HERS provider data registry, and provide
any additional information required by Reference Appendices RA2, RA3, NA1, and NA2.
iv. Include a declaration statement indicating that the installed features, materials, components or
manufactured devices requiring HERS verification conform to the applicable requirements in
Reference Appendices RA2, RA3, NA1, NA2, and the requirements specified on the Certificate(s)
of Compliance approved by the local enforcement agency, and confirms the same features,
materials, components or manufactured devices are identified on the applicable Certificate(s) of
Installation signed and submitted by the person(s) responsible for the construction or installation as
v. Be signed by the documentation author to certify the documentation is accurate and complete. The
signatures shall be electronic signatures on electronic documents in accordance with the electronic
signature specifications in Reference Joint Appendix JA7.
vi. Be signed by the HERS Rater who performed the field verification and diagnostic testing services
(responsible person). The signatures shall be electronic signatures on electronic documents in
accordance with the electronic signature specifications in Reference Joint Appendix JA7.
B. For all buildings for which compliance requires HERS field verification, the certified HERS Rater
responsible for the Certificate(s) of Verification shall submit the Certificates for registration and
retention to a HERS provider data registry in accordance with the applicable procedures in Reference
The submittals to the HERS provider data registry shall be made electronically in accordance with the
specifications in Reference Joint Appendix JA7.
Contingent upon availability and approval of an electronic document repository by the Executive
Director, Certificate of Verification documents that are registered and retained by a HERS provider
data registry shall also be automatically transmitted by the data registry, to an electronic document
repository for retention in accordance with the specifications in Reference Joint Appendix JA7.
C. Availability. For all buildings, a copy of the registered Certificate(s) of Verification shall be posted, or
made available with the building permit(s) issued for the building, or made available for viewing on an
approved data registry, and shall be made available to the enforcement agency for all applicable
inspections. If construction on any portion of the building subject to Part 6 will be impossible to inspect
because of subsequent construction, the enforcement agency may require the Certificate(s) of
Verification to be posted upon completion of that portion. A copy of the registered Certificate(s) of
Verification shall be included with the documentation the builder provides to the building owner at
EXCEPTION to Section 10-103(a): Enforcing agencies may exempt nonresidential buildings that have no
more than 1,000 square feet of conditioned floor area in the entire building and an occupant load of 49 persons
10-103 – PERMIT, CERTIFICATE, INFORMATIONAL, AND ENFORCEMENT REQUIREMENTS FOR
Page 14 2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards
or less from the documentation requirements of Section 10-103(a), provided a statement of compliance with Part
6 is submitted and signed by a licensed engineer or the licensed architect with chief responsibility for the design.
(b) Compliance, Operating, Maintenance, and Ventilation Information to be provided by Builder.
A. For low-rise residential buildings, at final inspection, the enforcement agency shall require the builder
to leave in the building, copies of the completed, signed, and submitted compliance documents for the
building owner at occupancy. For low-rise residential buildings, such information shall, at a minimum,
include copies of all Certificate of Compliance, Certificate of Installation, and Certificate of
Verification documentation submitted. These documents shall be in paper or electronic format and shall
conform to the applicable requirements of Section 10-103(a).
B. For nonresidential buildings, high-rise residential buildings and hotels and motels, at final inspection,
the enforcement agency shall require the builder to leave in the building, copies of the completed,
signed, and submitted compliance documents for the building owner at occupancy. For nonresidential
buildings, high-rise residential buildings and hotels and motels, such information shall include copies
of all Certificate of Compliance, Certificate of Installation, Certificate of Acceptance and Certificate of
Verification documentation submitted. These documents shall be in paper or electronic format and shall
conform to the applicable requirements of Section 10-103(a).
2. Operating information. At final inspection, the enforcement agency shall require the builder to leave in the
building, for the building owner at occupancy, operating information for all applicable features, materials,
components, and mechanical devices installed in the building. Operating information shall include
instructions on how to operate the features, materials, components, and mechanical devices correctly and
efficiently. The instructions shall be consistent with specifications set forth by the Executive Director. For
low-rise residential buildings, such information shall be contained in a folder or manual which provides all
information specified in Section 10-103(b). This operating information shall be in paper or electronic
For dwelling units, buildings or tenant spaces that are not individually owned and operated, or are centrally
operated, such information shall be provided to the person(s) responsible for operating the feature, material,
component or mechanical device installed in the building. This operating information shall be in paper or
3. Maintenance information. At final inspection, the enforcement agency shall require the builder to leave in
the building, for the building owner at occupancy, maintenance information for all features, materials,
components, and manufactured devices that require routine maintenance for efficient operation. Required
routine maintenance actions shall be clearly stated and incorporated on a readily accessible label. The label
may be limited to identifying, by title and/or publication number, the operation and maintenance manual for
that particular model and type of feature, material, component or manufactured device. For low-rise
residential buildings, this information shall include a schedule of all interior luminaires and lamps installed
For dwelling units, buildings or tenant spaces that are not individually owned and operated, or are centrally
operated, such information shall be provided to the person(s) responsible for maintaining the feature,
material, component or mechanical device installed in the building. This information shall be in paper or
A. For low-rise residential buildings, the enforcement agency shall require the builder to leave in the
building, for the building owner at occupancy, a description of the quantities of outdoor air that the
ventilation system(s) are designed to provide to the building’s conditioned space, and instructions for
proper operation and maintenance of the ventilation system. For buildings or tenant spaces that are not
individually owned and operated, or are centrally operated, such information shall be provided to the
person(s) responsible for operating and maintaining the feature, material, component or mechanical
ventilation device installed in the building. This information shall be in paper or electronic format.
B. For nonresidential buildings, high-rise residential buildings and hotels and motels, the enforcement
agency shall require the builder to provide the building owner at occupancy a description of the
quantities of outdoor and recirculated air that the ventilation systems are designed to provide to each
10-103 – PERMIT, CERTIFICATE, INFORMATIONAL, AND ENFORCEMENT REQUIREMENTS FOR
2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards Page 15
area. For buildings or tenant spaces that are not individually owned and operated, or are centrally
operated, such information shall be provided to the person(s) responsible for operating and maintaining
the feature, material, component or mechanical device installed in the building. This information shall
(c) Equipment Information to be Provided by Manufacturer or Supplier. The manufacturer or supplier of any
manufactured device shall, upon request, provide to building designers and installers information about the
device. The information shall include the efficiency (and other characteristics regulated by Part 6). This
information shall be in paper or electronic format.
1. Permits. An enforcement agency shall not issue a building permit for any construction unless the
enforcement agency determines in writing that the construction is designed to comply with the requirements
of Part 6 that are in effect on the date the building permit was applied for. The enforcement agency
determination shall confirm that the documentation requirements of Sections 10-103(a)1 and 10-103(a)2
If a building permit has been previously issued, there has been no construction under the permit, and the
permit has expired, the enforcement agency shall not issue a new permit unless the enforcement agency
determines in writing that the construction is designed to comply with the requirements of Part 6 in effect
on the date the new permit is applied for. The enforcement agency determination shall confirm that the
documentation requirements of Sections 10-103(a)1 and 10-103(a)2 have been met.
“Determines in writing” includes, but is not limited to, approval of a building permit with a stamp normally
2. Inspection. The enforcement agency shall inspect newly constructed buildings and additions, and
alterations to existing buildings to determine whether the construction or installation is consistent with the
agency's approved plans and specifications, and complies with Part 6. Final certificate of occupancy shall
not be issued until such consistency and compliance is verified. For Occupancy Group R-3, final inspection
shall not be complete until such consistency and compliance is verified.
Such verification shall include determination that:
A. All installed features, materials, components or manufactured devices, regulated by the Appliance
Efficiency Regulations or Part 6 are indicated, when applicable, on the Certificate(s) of Installation,
Certificate(s) of Acceptance and Certificate(s) of Verification, and are consistent with such features,
materials, components or manufactured devices given in the plans and specifications and the
Certificate(s) of Compliance approved by the local enforcement agency.
B. All required Certificates of Installation are posted, or made available with the building permit(s) issued
for the building, or made available for viewing on an approved data registry, and are made available to
the enforcement agency for all applicable inspections, and that all required Certificates of Installation
conform to the specifications of Section 10-103(a)3.
C. All required Certificates of Acceptance are posted, or made available with the building permit(s) issued
for the building, or made available for viewing on an approved data registry, and are made available to
the enforcement agency for all applicable inspections, and that all required Certificates of Acceptance
conform to the specifications of Section 10-103(a)4.
D. All required Certificates of Verification are posted, or made available with the building permit(s) issued
for the building, or made available for viewing on an approved data registry, and are made available to
the enforcement agency for all applicable inspections, and that all required Certificates of Verification
conform to the specifications of Section 10-103(a)5.
NOTE: Authority: Section 25402, 25402.1, Public Resources Code. Reference: Section 25402, Public Resources
10-103 – PERMIT, CERTIFICATE, INFORMATIONAL, AND ENFORCEMENT REQUIREMENTS FOR
Page 16 2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards
10-103.1 – NONRESIDENTIAL LIGHTING CONTROLS ACCEPTANCE
TEST TRAINING AND CERTIFICATION
(a) Scope. The requirements of this section apply to Acceptance Test Technicians (ATTs), Acceptance Test
Employers (ATEs), and Acceptance Test Technician Certification Providers (ATTCPs) that perform work
relating to the acceptance testing of nonresidential lighting systems and controls.
(b) Industry Certification Threshold. ATT and ATE certification requirements shall take effect when the Energy
Commission finds that each of the following conditions are met. Until such time that Sections 10-103.1(b)1 and
10-103.1(b)2 are met, or if, subsequent to being met, they cease to be maintained, Field Technicians may
complete acceptance testing as specified in Part 6, Section 130.4 without meeting the certification requirements
1. Number of Certified ATTs. There shall be no less than 300 ATTs certified to perform the lighting
acceptance tests in Building Energy Efficiency Standards, Section 130.4. The number of certified ATTs
shall be submitted to the Energy Commission in the annual reports prepared by ATTCPs, as specified in
2. Industry Coverage by ATTCPs. ATTCPs approved by the Energy Commission, in their entirety, shall
provide reasonable access to certification to the following industry groups: electrical contractors, certified
general electricians, licensed architects, professional engineers, controls installation and startup contractors
and certified commissioning professionals who have verifiable training, experience and expertise in lighting
controls and electrical systems. The Energy Commission will determine whether reasonable access to
certification is provided by considering factors such as certification costs commensurate with the
complexity of the training being provided, certification marketing materials, prequalification criteria, class
(c) Qualifications and Approval of ATTCPs. ATTCPs shall submit a written application to the Energy
Commission with a summary and the related background documents to explain how the following criteria and
1. Organizational Structure. ATTCPs shall provide written explanations of the organization type, by-
laws, and ownership structure. ATTCPs shall explain in writing how their certification program meets
the qualification requirements of Title 24, Part 1, Section 10-103.1(c). ATTCPs shall explain in their
application to the Energy Commission their organizational structure and their procedures for
independent oversight, quality assurance, supervision and support of the acceptance test training and
2. Certification of ATEs. The ATTCPs shall provide written explanations of their certification and
oversight of ATEs. This explanation shall document how the ATTCP ensures that ATEs are providing
quality control and appropriate supervision and support for their ATTs.
A. Recertification. The ATTCP shall recertify all ATEs prior to the implementation of each adopted
update to the Building Energy Efficiency Standards as these updates affect the acceptance test
requirements. Recertification requirements and procedures shall only apply to those specific
elements that are new or modified in future updates to Building Energy Efficiency Standards.
3. Training and Certification Procedures. ATTCPs shall include with their application a complete copy
of all training and testing procedures, manuals, handbooks and materials. ATTCPs shall explain in
writing how their training and certification procedures include, but are not limited to, the following:
A. Training Scope. The scope of the training shall include both hands-on experience and theoretical
training to certify competency in the technologies and skills necessary to perform the acceptance
i. Curricula. ATTCP training curricula for ATTs shall include, but not be limited to, the
analysis, theory, and practical application of the following:
10-103.1 – NONRESIDENTIAL LIGHTING CONTROLS ACCEPTANCE TEST TRAINING AND CERTIFICATION
2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards Page 17
g. Demand responsive signal inputs to lighting control systems;
h. Building Energy Efficiency Standards required lighting control systems;
i. Building Energy Efficiency Standards required lighting control system-specific
j. Integration of mechanical and electrical systems for Building Energy Efficiency
Standards required lighting control installation and commissioning;
k. Safety procedures for low-voltage retrofits (<50 volts) to control line voltage systems
l. Accurate and effective tuning, calibration, and programming of Building Energy
Efficiency Standards required lighting control systems;
m. Measurement of illuminance according to the Illuminating Engineering Society’s
measurement procedures as provided in the IES Lighting Handbook, 10th Edition,
n. Building Energy Efficiency Standards lighting controls acceptance testing
o. Building Energy Efficiency Standards acceptance testing compliance documentation
ii. Hands-on training. The ATTCP shall describe in its application the design and technical
specifications of the laboratory boards, equipment and other elements that will be used to
meet the hands-on requirements of the training and certification. iii. Prequalification.
Participation in the certification program shall be limited to persons who have at least
three years of professional experience and expertise in lighting controls and electrical
systems as determined by the Lighting Controls ATTCPs.
NOTE: ATTCPs may specify additional qualifications for participation in their programs,
such as limiting participation to persons that are not currently listed as “decertified” by
iv. Instructor to Trainee Ratio. The ATTCP shall document in its application to the Energy
Commission why its instructor to trainee ratio is sufficient to ensure the integrity and
efficacy of the curriculum and program based on industry standards and other relevant
v. Tests. The ATTCP shall describe the written and practical tests used to demonstrate each
certification applicant’s competence in all specified subjects. The ATTCPs shall retain all
results of these tests for five years from the date of the test.
vi. Recertification. The ATTCP shall recertify all ATTs prior to the implementation of each
adopted update to the Building Energy Efficiency Standards when these updates affect the
acceptance test requirements. Recertification requirements and procedures shall only
apply to those specific elements that are new or modified in future updates to Building
Energy Efficiency Standards. The ATTCP shall develop recertification training curricula
for ATTs consistent with training requirements in Sections 10-103.1(c)3A and 10-
103.1(c)3B, and shall submit the proposed recertification training curricula to the Energy
Commission for review and approval in the update report required under Section 10-
10-103.1 – NONRESIDENTIAL LIGHTING CONTROLS ACCEPTANCE TEST TRAINING AND CERTIFICATION
Page 18 2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards
C. ATE Training. Training for ATEs shall consist of a single class or webinar consisting of at least
four hours of instruction that covers the scope and process of the acceptance tests in Building
D. Complaint Procedures. The ATTCP shall describe in its applications to the Energy Commission
procedures for accepting and addressing complaints regarding the performance of any ATT or ATE
certified by the ATTCP, and explain how building departments and the public will be notified of
E. Decertification Procedures. The ATTCP shall describe in its applications to the Energy
Commission procedures for revoking their certification of ATTs and ATEs based upon poor quality
or ineffective work, failure to perform acceptance tests, falsification of documents, failure to
comply with the documentation requirements of these regulations or other specified actions that
justify decertification. The ATTCP shall also describe its general procedures for decertified ATTs
or ATEs seeking to regain their certification status, including eligibility requirements for
F. Quality Assurance and Accountability. The ATTCP shall describe in its application to the
Energy Commission its procedures for conducting quality assurance and accountability activities,
including but not limited to the following:
i. The ATTCP shall include quality assurance and accountability measures, including but not
limited to independent oversight of the certification materials, processes and procedures, visits
to building sites where certified technicians are completing acceptance tests, certification
process evaluations, building department surveys to determine acceptance testing
effectiveness, and expert review of the training curricula developed for Building Energy
ii. The ATTCP shall review a random sample of no less than 1 percent of each ATT’s completed
compliance forms, and shall perform randomly selected on-site audits of no less than 1 percent
of each ATT’s completed acceptance tests. Independent oversight may be demonstrated by
G. Certification Identification Number and Verification of ATT and ATE Certification Status.
The ATTCP shall describe in its application to the Energy Commission its procedures for
recording, tracking, and communicating certification status, including but not limited to the
i. Upon certification of an ATT or ATE, the ATTCP shall issue a unique certification
identification number to the ATT or ATE.
ii. The ATTCP shall maintain an accurate public record of the certification status for all ATTs
and ATEs that the ATTCP has certified, including any ATTs or ATEs who have been
iii. The ATTCP shall provide verification of current ATT certification status upon request to
authorized document Registration Provider personnel or enforcement agency personnel to
determine the ATT's eligibility to sign Certificate of Acceptance documentation according to
all applicable requirements in Sections 10-103.1, 10-102, 10-103(a)4, and the Reference Joint
(d) Requirements for ATTCPs to Provide Regular Reports. The ATTCP shall provide the following regular
1. Annual Report. The ATTCP shall provide an annual report to the Energy Commission that includes
A. A summary of the certification services provided over the reporting period, including the total
number of Acceptance Test Technicians and Employers certified by the ATTCP during the
B. A summary of all actions taken against any ATT or ATE as a result of the complaint or quality
assurance procedures described by the ATTCP as required under Section 10-103.1(c)(3)(D) and
10-103.1 – NONRESIDENTIAL LIGHTING CONTROLS ACCEPTANCE TEST TRAINING AND CERTIFICATION
2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards Page 19
C. A summary of the quality assurance and accountability activities conducted over the reporting
period, including the compliance forms reviewed and the on-site audits performed as required
under Section 10-103.1(c)3F(ii) during the reporting period and to date.
D. A summary of the number and type of acceptance tests performed in each local jurisdiction over
the reporting period and to date.
E. A signed certification to the Energy Commission that the ATTCP continues to meet the
2. Update Report. The ATTCP shall have no less than six months following the adoption of an update to
the Building Energy Efficiency Standards to prepare an Update Report. The ATTCP shall submit an
Update Report to the Energy Commission no less than six months prior to the effective date of any
newly adopted update to the Building Energy Efficiency Standards. The ATTCP shall report to the
Energy Commission what application amendments are proposed, to address changes to the Building
Energy Efficiency Standards or to ensure training is reflective of the variety of lighting controls that are
currently encountered in the field. All required update reports shall contain a signed certification that
the ATTCP continues to meet the requirements of Section 10-103.1. Update reports shall be approved
through the Amendment Process provided under Section 10-103.1(f).
All required reports shall contain a signed certification that the ATTCP has met all requirements for this
(e) Application Review and Determination. The Energy Commission shall review ATTCP applications
according to the criteria and procedures in Section 10-103.1(c) to determine if such providers meet the specified
requirements for providing acceptance testing certification services.
1. Energy Commission staff will review and validate all information received on ATTCP applications,
and determine whether the application is complete and contains sufficient information to be evaluated
by staff. Complete applications shall be evaluated by staff based on their contents.
2. The Executive Director may require that the applicant provide additional information as required by
staff to fully evaluate the ATTCP application.
3. The Executive Director shall provide a copy of the staff evaluation to interested persons and provide a
reasonable opportunity for public comment.
4. The Executive Director shall issue a written recommendation that the Energy Commission designate
the applicant as an authorized ATTCP or deny the application.
5. The Energy Commission shall make a final decision on the application at a publicly noticed hearing.
The ATTCP may amend a submitted or approved application, as follows:
A. Nonsubstantive Changes. A nonsubstantive change is a change that does not substantively alter the
requirements of the application materials for the ATTCP, ATT, or ATE. For amendments making only
nonsubstantive changes, the ATTCP shall submit the following:
i. A letter describing the change to the Energy Commission as an addendum to the application;
ii. A replacement copy of the affected sections of the ATTCP application with the changes
iii. A copy of the affected sections of the ATTCP application showing the changes in underline and
B. Substantive Changes. A substantive change is a change that substantively alters the requirements of
the application materials for the ATTCP, ATT, or ATE. For amendments making any substantive
changes, the ATTCP shall submit the following:
i. A document describing the scope of the change to the application, the reason for the change and
the potential impact to the ATTCP, ATT, and ATE as an addendum to the application;
10-103.1 – NONRESIDENTIAL LIGHTING CONTROLS ACCEPTANCE TEST TRAINING AND CERTIFICATION
Page 20 2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards
ii. A replacement copy of the affected sections of the ATTCP application with the changes
iii. A copy of the affected sections of the ATTCP application showing the changes in underline and
2. Amendment Review. Amendments submitted prior to approval of an ATTCP application shall be included
in the application’s Application Review and Determination process specified in Section 10-103.1(e).
Amendments submitted after approval of an ATTCP’s application that contain only nonsubstantive changes
shall be reviewed by the Executive Director for consistency with Section 10-103.1. Amendments
determined to be consistent with this Section shall be incorporated into the approval as errata.
Amendments submitted after approval of an ATTCP’s application that contain any substantive changes
shall be subject to the Application Review and Determination process specified in Section 10-103.1(e). If
the Energy Commission finds that the amended application does not meet the requirements of Section 10-
103.1, then the ATTCP shall either abide by the terms of their previously approved application or have their
If the Energy Commission determines there is a violation of these regulations or that an ATTCP is no longer
providing adequate certification services, the Energy Commission may revoke the authorization of the ATTCP
pursuant to Section 1230 et seq. of Title 20 of the California Code of Regulations.
10-103.1 – NONRESIDENTIAL LIGHTING CONTROLS ACCEPTANCE TEST TRAINING AND CERTIFICATION
2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards Page 21
10-103.2 – NONRESIDENTIAL MECHANICAL ACCEPTANCE TEST
(a) Scope. The requirements of this section apply to Acceptance Test Technicians (ATTs), Acceptance Test
Employers (ATEs), and Acceptance Test Technician Certification Providers (ATTCPs) that perform work
relating to the acceptance testing of nonresidential mechanical systems and controls.
(b) Industry Certification Threshold. ATT and ATE certification requirements shall take effect when the Energy
Commission finds that each of the following conditions are met. Until such time that Sections 10-103.2(b)1 and
10-103.2(b)2 are met, or if, subsequent to being met, they cease to be maintained, Field Technicians may
complete acceptance testing as specified in Section 120.5 without completing certification requirements
A. There shall be no less than 300 ATTs certified to perform the complete set of mechanical acceptance
tests in Building Energy Efficiency Standards, Section 120.5, except as provided in Subsection 10-
103.2(b)1.B. The number of certified ATTs shall be submitted to the Energy Commission in the annual
reports prepared by ATTCPs, as specified in Section 10-103.2(d)1.
B. If there are less than 300 ATTs certified to perform all of the acceptance tests in Building Energy
Efficiency Standards, Section 120.5, then there shall be at least 300 ATTs certified to complete the
i. NA7.5.1 Outdoor Air Ventilation Systems
ii. NA7.5.2 Constant Volume, Single Zone Unitary Air Conditioners and Heat Pumps
iv. NA7.5.5 Demand Control Ventilation Systems
v. NA 7.5.6 Supply Fan Variable Flow Controls
vi. NA7.5.7, NA7.5.9 Hydronic System Variable Flow Controls
vii. NA7.5.10 Automatic Demand Shed Controls
2. Industry Coverage by ATTCPs. ATTCPs approved by the Energy Commission, in their entirety, provide
reasonable access to certification to the following industry groups: Professional engineers, licensed
architects, HVAC installers, mechanical contractors, Testing and Balancing (TAB) certified technicians,
controls installation and startup contractors and certified commissioning professionals who have verifiable
training, experience and expertise in HVAC systems. The Energy Commission will determine reasonable
access by considering factors such as certification costs commensurate with the complexity of the training
being provided, certification marketing materials, prequalification criteria, class availability and curriculum.
(c) Qualifications and Approval of ATTCPs. ATTCPs shall submit a written application to the Energy
Commission with a summary and the necessary background documents to explain how the following criteria
and procedures have been met:
1. Organizational Structure. ATTCPs shall provide written explanations of the organization type, by-
laws, and ownership structure. ATTCPs shall explain in writing how their certification program meets
the qualifications of Building Energy Efficiency Standards, Section 10-103.2(c). ATTCPs shall explain
in their application to the Energy Commission their organizational structure and their procedures for
independent oversight, quality assurance, supervision and support of the acceptance test training and
2. Certification of ATEs. The ATTCPs shall provide written explanations of their certification and
oversight of ATEs. This explanation shall document how the ATTCP ensures that ATEs are providing
quality control and appropriate supervision and support for their ATTs.
A. Recertification. The ATTCP shall recertify all ATEs prior to the implementation of each adopted
update to the Building Energy Efficiency Standards as these updates affect the acceptance test
requirements. Recertification requirements and procedures shall only apply to those specific
elements that are new or modified in future updates to Building Energy Efficiency Standards.
3. Requirements for Applicant ATTCPs to Document Training and Certification Procedures.
ATTCPs shall include with their application a complete copy of all training and testing procedures,
10-103.2 – NONRESIDENTIAL MECHANICAL ACCEPTANCE TEST TRAINING AND CERTIFICATION
Page 22 2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards
manuals, handbooks and materials. ATTCPs shall explain in writing how their training and certification
procedures include, but are not limited to, the following:
A. Training Scope. The scope of the training shall include both hands-on experience and theoretical
training to certify competency in the technologies and skills necessary to perform the acceptance
i. Curricula. ATTCP training curricula for ATTs shall include, but not be limited to, the
analysis, theory, and practical application of the following:
e. Demand controlled ventilation with CO sensors;
f. Demand controlled ventilation with occupancy sensors;
i. Hydronic system variable flow controls;
j. Supply air temperature reset controls;
k. Condenser water temperature reset controls;
m. Supply fan variable flow controls;
n. Boiler and chiller isolation controls;
o. Fault detection and diagnostics for packaged direct-expansion units;
p. Automatic fault detection and diagnostics for air handling units and zone terminal units;
q. Distributed energy storage direct-expansion air conditioning systems;
s. Building Energy Efficiency Standards mechanical acceptance testing procedures; and
t. Building Energy Efficiency Standards acceptance testing compliance documentation for
ii. Hands-on training. The ATTCP shall describe in its application the design and technical
specifications of the laboratory boards, equipment and other elements that will be used to meet
the hands-on requirements of the training and certification.
iii. Prequalification. Participation in the certification program shall be limited to persons who
have at least three years of professional experience and expertise in mechanical controls and
systems as determined by the Mechanical ATTCPs.
NOTE: ATTCPs may specify additional qualifications for participation in their programs,
such as limiting participation to persons that are not currently listed as “decertified” by another
iv. Instructor to Trainee Ratio. The ATTCP shall document in its application to the Energy
Commission why its instructor to trainee ratio is sufficient to ensure the integrity and efficacy
of the curriculum and program based on industry standards and other relevant information.
10-103.2 – NONRESIDENTIAL MECHANICAL ACCEPTANCE TEST TRAINING AND CERTIFICATION
2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards Page 23
v. Tests. The ATTCP shall describe the written and practical tests used to demonstrate each
certification applicant’s competence in all specified subjects. The ATTCPs shall retain all
results of these tests for five years from the date of the test.
vi. Recertification. The ATTCP shall recertify all ATTs prior to the implementation of each
adopted update to the Building Energy Efficiency Standards as these updates affect the
acceptance test requirements. Recertification requirements and procedures shall only apply to
those specific elements that are new or modified in future updates to Building Energy
C. ATE Training. Training for ATEs shall consist of a single class or webinar consisting of at least
four hours of instruction that covers the scope and process of the acceptance tests in Building
D. Complaint Procedures. Procedures described in writing for notifying building departments and
the public that the ATTCP will accept complaints regarding the performance of any certified ATT
or ATE, and procedures for how the ATTCP will address these complaints.
E. Decertification Procedures. The ATTCP shall describe in its application to the Energy
Commission procedures for revoking their certification of ATTs and ATEs based upon poor
quality or ineffective work, failure to perform acceptance tests, falsification of documents, failure
to comply with the documentation requirements of these regulations or other specified actions that
justify decertification. The ATTCP shall also describe its general procedures for decertified ATTs
or ATEs seeking to regain their certification status, including eligibility requirements for
F. Quality Assurance and Accountability. The ATTCP shall describe in its applications to the
Energy Commission procedures for conducting quality assurance and accountability activities,
including but not limited to the following:
i. The ATTCPs shall include quality assurance and accountability measures, including but not
limited to independent oversight of the certification materials, processes and procedures, visits
to building sites where certified technicians are completing acceptance tests, certification
process evaluations, building department surveys to determine acceptance testing
effectiveness, and expert review of the training curricula developed for Building Energy
ii. The ATTCP shall review a random sample of no less than 1 percent of each ATT’s completed
compliance forms. The ATTCP shall also randomly select and shadow audit no less than 1
percent of each ATE’s overseen projects, following the assigned ATT and observing their
performance on the job site. Independent oversight may be demonstrated by accreditation
G. Certification Identification Number and Verification of ATT and ATE Certification Status.
The ATTCP shall describe in its applications to the Energy Commission procedures for recording,
tracking, and communicating certification status, including but not limited to the following:
i. Upon certification of an ATT or ATE, the ATTCP shall issue a unique certification
identification number to the ATT or ATE.
ii. The ATTCP shall maintain an accurate public record of the certification status for all ATTs
and ATEs that the ATTCP has certified, including any ATTs or ATEs who have been
iii. The ATTCP shall provide verification of current ATT certification status upon request to
authorized document Registration Provider personnel or enforcement agency personnel to
determine the ATT's eligibility to sign Certificate of Acceptance documentation according to
(d) Requirements for ATTCPs to Provide Regular Reports. The ATTCP shall provide the following regular
10-103.2 – NONRESIDENTIAL MECHANICAL ACCEPTANCE TEST TRAINING AND CERTIFICATION
Page 24 2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards
1. Annual Report. The ATTCP shall provide an annual report to the Energy Commission that includes
A. A summary of the certification services provided over the reporting period, including the total
number of Acceptance Test Technicians and Employers certified by the agency during the
B. A summary of all actions taken against any ATT or ATE as a result of the complaint or quality
assurance procedures described by the ATTCP as required under Section 10-103.2(c)(3)(D) and
C. A summary of the quality assurance and accountability activities conducted over the reporting
period, including the compliance forms reviewed and the on-site audits performed as required
under Section 10-103.2(c)3F(ii) during the reporting period and to date.
D. A summary of the number and type of acceptance tests performed in each local jurisdiction over
the reporting period and to date.
E. A signed certification to the Energy Commission that the ATTCP continues to meet the
2. Update Report. The ATTCP shall have no less than six months following the adoption of an update to
the Building Energy Efficiency Standards to prepare an Update Report. The ATTCP shall submit an
Update Report to the Energy Commission no less than six months prior to the effective date of any
newly adopted update to the Building Energy Efficiency Standards, The ATTCP shall report to the
Energy Commission what application amendments are proposed to address changes to the Building
Energy Efficiency Standards or to ensure training is reflective of the variety of mechanical equipment
and systems currently encountered in the field. All required update reports shall contain a signed
certification that the ATTCP continues to meet all the requirements of Section 10-103.2(c). Update
reports shall be approved through the Amendment Process provided under Section 10-103.2(f).
All required reports shall contain a signed certification that the ATTCP has met all requirements for this program.
(e) Application Review and Determination. The Energy Commission shall review ATTCP applications according
to the criteria and procedures in Section 10-103.2(c) to determine if such providers meet the specified
requirements for providing acceptance testing certification services.
1. Energy Commission staff will review and validate all information received on ATTCP applications, and
determine whether the application is complete and contains sufficient information to be evaluated by staff.
Complete applications shall be evaluated by staff based on their contents.
2. The Executive Director may require that the applicant provide additional information as required by staff to
fully evaluate the ATTCP application.
3. The Executive Director shall provide a copy of the staff evaluation to interested persons and provide an
4. The Executive Director shall issue a written recommendation that the Energy Commission designate the
applicant as an authorized ATTCP or deny the Provider application.
5. The Energy Commission shall make a final decision on the application at a publicly noticed hearing.
The ATTCP may amend a submitted or approved application, as follows:
A. Nonsubstantive Changes. A nonsubstantive change is a change that does not substantively alter the
requirements of the application materials for the ATTCP, ATT, or ATE. For amendments making only
nonsubstantive changes, the ATTCP shall submit the following:
i. a letter describing the change to the Energy Commission as an addendum to the application;
ii. A replacement copy of the affected sections of the ATTCP application with the changes
10-103.2 – NONRESIDENTIAL MECHANICAL ACCEPTANCE TEST TRAINING AND CERTIFICATION
2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards Page 25
iii. A copy of the affected sections of the ATTCP application showing the changes in underline and
B. Substantive Changes. A substantive change is a change that substantively alters the requirements of
the application materials for the ATTCP, ATT, or ATE. For amendments making any substantive
changes, the ATTCP shall submit the following:
i. A document describing the scope of the change to the application, the reason for the change and
the potential impact to the ATTCP, ATT, and ATE as an addendum to the application;
ii. A replacement copy of the affected sections of the ATTCP application with the changes
iii. A copy of the affected sections of the ATTCP application showing the changes in underline and
2. Amendment Review. Amendments submitted prior to approval of an ATTCP application shall be included
in the application’s Application Review and Determination process specified in Section 10-103.2(e).
Amendments submitted after approval of an ATTCP’s application that contain only nonsubstantive changes
shall be reviewed by the Executive Director for consistency with Section 10-103.2. Amendments
determined to be consistent with this Section shall be incorporated into the approval as errata.
Amendments submitted after approval of an ATTCP’s application that contain any substantive changes
shall be subject to the Application Review and Determination process specified in Section 10-103.2(e). If
the Energy Commission finds that the amended application does not meet the requirements of Section 10-
103.2, then the ATTCP shall either abide by the terms of their previously approved application or have their
If the Energy Commission determines there is a violation of these regulations or that an ATTCP is no longer
providing adequate certification services, the Energy Commission may revoke the authorization of the ATTCP
pursuant to Section 1230 et. seq. of Title 20 of the California Code of Regulations.
10-103.2 – NONRESIDENTIAL MECHANICAL ACCEPTANCE TEST TRAINING AND CERTIFICATION
Page 26 2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards
NOTE: See Section 10-109 for approval of calculation methods and Alternative Component Packages.
(a) Requirements. If a building permit applicant proposes to use a performance compliance approach, and the
building designs cannot be adequately modeled by an approved calculation method, an applicant shall be granted
a building permit if the Commission finds:
1. That the design cannot be adequately modeled with an approved calculation method;
2. Using an alternative evaluation technique, that the design complies with Part 6; and
3. That the enforcement agency has determined that the design complies with all other legal requirements.
(b) Applications. The applicant shall submit four copies of a signed application with the following materials to the
1. A copy of the plans and documentation required by Section 10-103(a)2;
2. A statement explaining why meeting the energy budget cannot be demonstrated using an approved
3. Documentation from the enforcement agency stating that:
A. Meeting the energy budget requirements cannot be demonstrated using an approved calculation
B. The design complies with all other legal requirements; and
4. A detailed evaluation of the energy consumption of the proposed building and the building's materials,
components, and manufactured devices proposed to be installed to meet the requirements of Part 6 using an
alternative evaluation technique. The evaluation shall include a copy of the technique, instructions for its
use, a list of all input data, and all other information required to replicate the results.
2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards Page 27
(a) Where there is No Local Enforcement Agency. Before new construction may begin in an area where there is
no local enforcement agency, the Executive Director shall determine in writing that the building design
conforms to the requirements of Part 6. The person proposing to construct the building shall submit the
information described in Sections 10-103(a)1 and 10-103(a)2 to the Executive Director when such a
(b) Where building construction is under the jurisdiction of a State agency. Pursuant to Public Resources Code
Section 25402.1(g)(5), no construction of any State building shall commence until the Department of General
Services or the State agency that otherwise has jurisdiction over the property determines that the construction is
designed to comply with the requirements of Part 6, and confirms that the documentation requirements of
Sections 10-103(a)1 and 10-103(a)2 have been met and that the plans indicate the features and performance
specifications needed to comply with Part 6. The responsible state agency shall notify the Commission’s
(c) Where the Enforcement Agency Fails to Enforce. If an enforcement agency fails to enforce the requirements
of this article or of Part 6 the Commission, after furnishing 10 days written notice, may condition building
permit issuance on submission of the information described in Sections 10-103(a)1 and 10-103(a)2 to the
Executive Director and on his or her written determination that proposed construction conforms to the
NOTE: Authority: Code Section 25402.1, Public Resources Code. Reference: Section 25402.1, Public Resources
Page 28 2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards
10-106 – LOCALLY ADOPTED ENERGY STANDARDS
(a) Requirements. Local governmental agencies may adopt and enforce energy standards for newly constructed
buildings, additions, alterations, and repairs to existing buildings provided the following two requirements are
met prior to any enforcement of the standards:
1. A determination that the standards are cost effective is adopted by the local agency at a public meeting and
subsequently filed with the Energy Commission; and
2. The Energy Commission finds that the standards will require buildings to be designed to consume less
energy than permitted by Title 24, Part 6.
(b) Documentation Application. Local governmental agencies wishing to enforce energy standards subject to
Section10-106(a) shall submit an application with the following materials to the Executive Director:
2. The local governmental agency's findings and supporting analyses on the energy savings and cost
effectiveness of the proposed energy standards;
3. A statement or finding by the local governmental agency that the proposed energy standards will require
buildings to be designed to consume less energy than permitted by Part 6; and
4. Any findings, determinations, declarations or reports, including any negative declaration or environmental
impact report, required pursuant to the California Environmental Quality Act, Pub. Resources Code Section
10-106 – LOCALLY ADOPTED ENERGY STANDARDS
2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards Page 29
(a) The Commission may make a written determination as to the applicability or interpretation of any provision of
this article or of Part 6 upon written application, if a dispute concerning a provision arises between an applicant
for a building permit and the enforcement agency, and the dispute has been heard by the local board of permit
appeals or other highest local review body. Notice of any such appeal, including a summary of the dispute and
the section of the regulations involved, shall if possible be sent to the Commission by the enforcing agency 15
days before the appeal is heard, and the result of the appeal shall be sent to the Commission within 15 days after
the decision is made. Either party to the dispute may apply for a determination but shall concurrently deliver a
copy of the application to the other party. The determinations are binding on the parties.
(b) The Executive Director may, upon request, give written advice concerning the meaning of any provision of this
article or of Part 6. Such advice is not binding on any person.
NOTE: Authority: Section 25402.1, Public Resources Code. Reference: Section 25218.5 and 25402.1, Public
Page 30 2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards
(a) Requirements. The Commission may exempt any building from any provision of Part 6 if it finds that:
1. Substantial funds had been expended in good faith on planning, designing, architecture, or engineering of
the building before the adoption date of the provision; and
2. Compliance with the requirements of the provision would be impossible without both substantial delays and
substantial increases in costs of construction above the reasonable costs of the measures required to comply
(b) Application. The applicant shall submit four copies of a signed application with the following materials to the
1. A summary of the claimant's contracts for the project;
2. A summary of internal financial reports on the project;
3. Dated schedules of design activities; and
NOTE: Authority: Section 25402.1, Public Resources Code. Reference: Section 25402.1, Public Resources Code.
2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards Page 31
PACKAGES, EXCEPTIONAL METHODS, DATA REGISTRIES AND
RELATED EXTERNAL DIGITAL DATA SOURCES, ALTERNATIVE
RESIDENTIAL FIELD VERIFICATION PROTOCOLS, ELECTRONIC
DOCUMENT REPOSITORIES, AND PHOTOVOLTAIC SYSTEM
(a) Compliance software, alternative component packages, exceptional methods, data registries and related
data input software, alternative residential field verification protocols or electronic document repositories
must be approved by the Commission in order to be used to demonstrate compliance with Part 6.
(b) Application. Applications for approval of compliance software, alternative component packages, exceptional
methods, data registries and related data input software, and alternative field verification protocols must be made
1.An applicant shall submit four copies of a signed application form specified by the Executive Director.
2.The application shall include the following materials:
A. A description of the functional or analytical capabilities of the compliance software, alternative
component package, calculation method, exceptional method, data registry or related data input
software, and alternative field verification protocol; and
B. A demonstration that the criteria in Section 10-109 are met; and
C. An initial fee of one thousand dollars ($1,000). The total fee shall cover the Commission's cost of
reviewing and analyzing the application. Within 75 days of receipt of an application, the Commission
will provide an estimate of the total maximum cost to review and analyze the application and make a
determination as to the completeness of the application. Consideration of the application will be
delayed until the applicant submits requested additional information. After the Commission determines
the total cost, if the cost exceeds the initial fee, the Commission shall assess an additional fee to cover
the total cost. If the actual cost is less than the initial, or any estimated maximum, fee the Commission
shall refund the difference to the applicant.
1. Public Domain Computer Programs. In addition to the public domain computer programs that are
approved pursuant to Public Resources Code Section 25402.1, the Commission may, upon written
application or its own motion, approve additional public domain computer programs that may be used to
demonstrate that proposed building designs meet energy budgets.
A. The Commission shall ensure that users' manuals or guides for each approved program are available.
B. The Commission shall approve a program only if it predicts energy consumption substantially
equivalent to that predicted by the above-referenced public domain computer program, when it models
2. Alternative Calculation Methods (All Occupancies). The Commission may approve non-public domain
computer programs as an alternative calculation method that building permit applicants may then use to
demonstrate compliance with the performance standards (energy budgets) in Part 6. In addition to the
application requirements of subdivision (b) above, an application for approval of compliance software must
include documentation demonstrating that the compliance software meets the requirements, specifications,
and criteria set forth in the Residential or Nonresidential ACM Approval Manual, as appropriate.
NOTE: Copies of the ACM Approval Manuals may be obtained from the Commission's website at:
10-109 – COMPLIANCE SOFTWARE, ALTERNATIVE COMPONENT PACKAGES, EXCEPTIONAL METHODS,
DATA REGISTRIES AND RELATED EXTERNAL DIGITAL DATA SOURCES, ALTERNATIVE RESIDENTIAL
FIELD VERIFICATION PROTOCOLS, ELECTRONIC DOCUMENT REPOSITORIES, AND PHOTOVOLTAIC
Page 32 2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards
(d) Alternative Component Packages. In addition to the application requirements of subdivision (b) above, an
application for approval of an alternative component package must include documentation that demonstrates that
1. Will meet the applicable energy budgets; and
2. Is likely to apply to a significant percentage of newly constructed buildings or to a significant segment of
the building construction and design community.
(e) Exceptional Methods. The Commission may approve an exceptional method that analyzes a design, material,
or device that cannot be adequately modeled using the public domain computer programs. Applications for
approval of exceptional methods shall include all information needed to verify the method's accuracy.
(f) Commission Action. The Commission may take the following actions on an application submitted pursuant to
(g) Resubmittal. An applicant may resubmit a rejected application or may request modification of a restricted
approval. Such application shall include the information required pursuant to this section, and, if applicable,
shall indicate how the proposed compliance software, alternative component package, exceptional method, data
registry or related data input software has been changed to enhance its accuracy or capabilities.
1. Modification. Whenever an approved compliance software, alternative component package, exceptional
method, data registry or related data input software is changed in any way, it must be resubmitted under this
2. The Commission may modify or withdraw approval of compliance software, an alternative component
package, an exceptional method, or a data registry or related data input software based on its approval of
other programs, methods, registries or data input software that are more suitable.
(h) In addition to the procedures and protocols identified in the Alternative Calculation Method Approval Manuals
and the Reference Appendices, the Commission may authorize alternative procedures or protocols that
demonstrate compliance with Part 6.
(i) Data Registries And Related External Digital Data Sources, And Electronic Document Repositories.
1. Data Registries and Related External Digital Data Sources.
Data registries and related external digital data sources shall conform to the requirements specified in
A. The Commission may approve residential data registries that provide for registration, when required by
Part 6 of all residential compliance documentation and the nonresidential Certificates of Verification.
B. The Commission may approve nonresidential data registries that provide for registration, when required
by Part 6 of all nonresidential compliance documentation. However, nonresidential data registries may
not provide for registration of nonresidential Certificates of Verification.
C. The Commission may approve external digital data sources used for data input to various data registries
for registering, when required by Part 6 residential or nonresidential compliance documentation.
A. The Commission may approve electronic document repositories that retain for the Commission
electronic compliance documentation generated by residential and nonresidential data registries when
(j) Alternative Residential Field Verification Protocols.
Alternative residential field verification protocols shall comply with the application requirements of Section 10-
109(b) and any applicable requirements of Reference Residential Appendices RA1.
10-109 – COMPLIANCE SOFTWARE, ALTERNATIVE COMPONENT PACKAGES, EXCEPTIONAL METHODS,
DATA REGISTRIES AND RELATED EXTERNAL DIGITAL DATA SOURCES, ALTERNATIVE RESIDENTIAL
FIELD VERIFICATION PROTOCOLS, ELECTRONIC DOCUMENT REPOSITORIES, AND PHOTOVOLTAIC
2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards Page 33
The Commission may, upon written application or its own motion, determine that the photovoltaic requirements
in Section 150.1(c)14 shall not apply, if the Commission finds that the implementation of public agency rules
regarding utility system costs and revenue requirements, compensation for customer-owned generation, or
interconnection fees, causes the Commission’s cost effectiveness conclusions, made pursuant to Public
Resources Code 25402(b)(3), to not hold for particular buildings.
Applications shall include full information regarding the differences between public agency rules and Energy
Commission cost effectiveness determinations, including all information requested by the Commission to enable
full review of the application. Applications shall also include specific recommended limitations to the scope of
the determination that is requested, and specific eligibility criteria to determine what buildings would qualify for
the determination. Applications from public agencies shall be submitted to the Energy Commission only after
public review within the jurisdiction of the public entity or service area of the utility.
10-109 – COMPLIANCE SOFTWARE, ALTERNATIVE COMPONENT PACKAGES, EXCEPTIONAL METHODS,
DATA REGISTRIES AND RELATED EXTERNAL DIGITAL DATA SOURCES, ALTERNATIVE RESIDENTIAL
FIELD VERIFICATION PROTOCOLS, ELECTRONIC DOCUMENT REPOSITORIES, AND PHOTOVOLTAIC
2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards Page 35
10-110 – PROCEDURES FOR CONSIDERATION OF APPLICATIONS
(a) Within 75 days of receipt of an application, the Executive Director shall determine if the application is complete
(b) Once the application is determined to be complete, the Executive Director shall make the complete application
package available to interested parties for review and comment. Comments from interested parties must be
submitted within a time period set by the Executive Director, which shall be no less than 15 and no greater than
60 days after the complete application package is made available.
(c) Within 75 days of the date the application is determined to be complete, the Executive Director may request any
additional information needed to evaluate the application. Consideration of the application will be delayed until
the applicant submits the requested additional information.
(d) Within 75 days of the date the application is determined to be complete, the Executive Director may convene a
workshop to gather additional information from the applicant and other interested parties. Interested parties will
have 15 days after the workshop to submit additional comments or information regarding the application.
(e) Within 90 days of the date the application is determined to be complete, or within 30 days after receipt of
complete additional information requested under Section 10-110(c), or within 60 days after the receipt of
additional information submitted by interested parties under Section 10-110(d), whichever is later, the Executive
Director shall submit to the Commission a written recommendation on the application.
(f) The complete application package, any additional information considered by the Executive Director, and the
Executive Director's recommendation shall be placed on the consent calendar and considered at the next
business meeting after submission of the recommendation. The matter may be removed from the consent
calendar at the request of any person.
(g) The Executive Director may charge a fee to recover the costs of processing and reviewing applications, with the
(h) All applicants have the burden of proof to establish that their applications should be granted.
NOTE: Authority: Section 25402.1, Public Resources Code. Reference: Section 25402.1, Public Resources Code.
10-110 – PROCEDURES FOR CONSIDERATION OF APPLICATIONS UNDER SECTIONS 10-104, 10-106, 10-
Page 36 2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards
10-111 – CERTIFICATION AND LABELING OF FENESTRATION
PRODUCT AND EXTERIOR DOOR U-FACTORS, SOLAR HEAT GAIN
COEFFICIENTS, VISIBLE TRANSMITTANCE AND AIR LEAKAGE
This section establishes rules for implementing labeling and certification requirements relating to U-factors, solar
heat gain coefficients (SHGCs), visible transmittance (VT) and air leakage for fenestration products and exterior
doors under Section 110.6(a) of Part 6. This section also provides for designation of the National Fenestration Rating
Council (NFRC) as the supervisory entity responsible for administering the state's certification program for
fenestration products and exterior doors, provided NFRC meets specified criteria.
A. Every manufactured fenestration product and exterior door shall have attached to it a clearly visible
temporary label that lists the U-factor, the solar heat gain coefficient (SHGC) and Visible
Transmittance (VT) and that certifies compliance with the air leakage requirements of Section
110.6(a)1. Temporary labels for manufactured fenestration products and exterior doors are to incorporate the
values determined by Section 10-111(a)1B and shall comply with the labeling requirements of NFRC 700. No
other values for U-factor, SHGC, VT and Air Leakage are allowed on the temporary label attached to the
manufactured fenestration product or exterior door. Component Modeling Approach (CMA) and site-built
fenestration products shall have an NFRC label certificate that lists the U-factor, the Solar Heat Gain
Coefficient (SHGC), and the Visible Transmittance (VT) and shall comply with the labeling
requirements of NFRC 705 for the Computer Modeling Approach or NFRC 700 for site-built
B. U-factor, SHGC, VT and Air Leakage shall be determined by either:
i. Fenestration products and exterior doors rated and certified using NFRC 100, NFRC 200, NFRC
202 NFRC 203 or NFRC 400 Rating Procedures. The manufacturer shall stipulate that the ratings
were determined in accordance with applicable NFRC procedures. For manufactured fenestration
products and exterior doors, a temporary label certificate approved by the supervisory entity
(NFRC) meets the requirements of this section. For component modeling and site-built fenestration
products, a label certificate approved by the supervisory entity (NFRC) meets the requirements of
ii. For manufactured or site-built fenestration products and exterior doors not rated by NFRC, a
temporary label with the words “CEC Default U-factor,” followed by the appropriate default U-
factor specified in Section 110.6(a)2 and with the words “CEC Default SHGC,” followed by the
appropriate default SHGC specified in Section 110.6(a)3 and with the words "CEC Default VT,"
followed by the appropriate VT as specified in Section 110.6(a)4, meets the requirements of this
C. Temporary labels shall also certify that the manufactured fenestration product or exterior door complies
with the air leakage requirements of Section 110.6(a)1 of the Standards.
2. Permanent labels. Rated products shall have a permanent label consistent with their rating and certification
that is either a stand-alone label, an extension or tab of an existing permanent certification label being used
by the manufacturer/responsible party, or a series of marks or etchings on the product. The permanent label
coupled with observable product characteristics, shall be usable to trace the product to certification
information on file with the supervisory entity or to a directory of certified products, published by the
supervisory entity. For CMA and site-built fenestration products, a label certificate approved by the
supervisory entity meets the requirements of this section.
EXCEPTION to Section 10-111(a): Field-fabricated fenestration products.
1. Certification to default ratings. The manufacturer shall certify on the Default Label that the product's U-
10-111 – CERTIFICATION AND LABELING OF FENESTRATION PRODUCT AND EXTERIOR DOOR U-
FACTORS, SOLAR HEAT GAIN COEFFICIENTS, VISIBLE TRANSMITTANCE AND AIR LEAKAGE
2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards Page 37
A. A temporary label, affixed to the product, that meets the requirements of Section 10-111(a)1B meets
B. If the product claims the default U-factor for a thermal break product, the manufacturer shall also
certify on the label that the product meets the thermal break product criteria, specified on the default
table, on which the default value is based. Placing the terms “Meets Thermal Break Default Criteria” on
the default temporary label or default label certificate meets this requirement.
2. Certification to NFRC rating procedure. If a product's U-factor, SHGC or VT is based on the NFRC
Rating Procedure, the U-factor, SHGC or VT shall be certified by the manufacturer according to the
procedures of an independent certifying organization approved by the Commission.
A. A temporary label, affixed to the product or label certificate for CMA and site-built fenestration,
meeting the requirements of Section 10-111(a) certified by the independent certifying organization
B. An “independent certifying organization approved by the Commission” means any organization
authorized by the supervisory entity to certify U-factor ratings, Solar Heat Gain Coefficient and Visible
Transmittance ratings in accordance with the NFRC Rating Procedure. If the Commission designates
the NFRC as the supervisory entity, any independent certification and inspection agency (IA) licensed
by NFRC shall be deemed to be an “independent certifying organization approved by the
C. The “supervisory entity” means the NFRC, except as provided in Section 10-111(c)1.
EXCEPTION to Section 10-111(b): Field-fabricated fenestration products.
(c) Designation of Supervisory Entity. The NFRC shall be the supervisory entity to administer the certification
program relating to U-factors, SHGC, and VT ratings for fenestration products and exterior doors, provided the
Commission determines that the NFRC meets the criteria in Section 10-111(d).
1. The Commission may consider designating a supervisory entity other than NFRC only if the Commission
determines that the NFRC cannot meet the criteria in Section 10-111(d). Such other supervisory entity shall
meet the criteria in Section 10-111(d) prior to being designated.
2. The Commission shall periodically review, at least annually, the structure and operations of the supervisory
entity to ensure continuing compliance with the criteria in Section 10-111(d).
1. Membership in the entity shall be open on a nondiscriminatory basis to any person or organization that has
an interest in uniform thermal performance ratings for fenestration products and exterior doors, including,
but not limited to, members of the fenestration industry, glazing infill industry, building industry, design
professionals, specifiers, utilities, government agencies, and public interest organizations. The membership
shall be composed of a broad cross section of those interested in uniform thermal performance ratings for
2. The governing body of the entity shall reflect a reasonable cross section of the interests represented by the
3. The entity shall maintain a program of oversight of product manufacturers, laboratories, and independent
certifying organizations that ensures uniform application of the NFRC Rating Procedures, labeling and
certification, and such other rating procedures for other factors affecting energy performance as the NFRC
and the Commission may adopt.
4. The entity shall require manufacturers and independent certifying organizations within its program to use
laboratories accredited by the supervisory entity to perform simulations and tests under the NFRC Rating
Procedure or by an NFRC Approved Calculation Entity (ACE) under the Component Modeling Approach
5. The entity shall maintain appropriate guidelines for testing and simulation laboratories, manufacturers, and
certifying agencies, including requirements for adequate:
10-111 – CERTIFICATION AND LABELING OF FENESTRATION PRODUCT AND EXTERIOR DOOR U-
FACTORS, SOLAR HEAT GAIN COEFFICIENTS, VISIBLE TRANSMITTANCE AND AIR LEAKAGE
Page 38 2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards
E. Periodic review (including, but not limited to, blind testing by laboratories; inspections of products; and
inspections of laboratories, manufacturing facilities, and certifying agencies);
G. Guidelines to maintain the integrity of the program, including, but not limited to, provisions to avoid
conflicts of interest within the rating and certification process.
6. The entity shall be a nonprofit organization and shall maintain reasonable, nondiscriminatory fee schedules
for the services it provides and shall make its fee schedules, the financial information on which fees are
based, and financial statements available to its members for inspection.
7. The entity shall provide hearing processes that give laboratories, manufacturers, and certifying agencies a
fair review of decisions that adversely affect them.
8. The entity shall maintain a certification policy committee whose procedures are designed to avoid conflicts
of interest in deciding appeals, resolving disputes, and setting policy for the certifying organizations within
9. The entity shall publish at least annually a directory of products certified and decertified within its program.
10. The entity itself shall be free from conflict-of-interest ties or to undue influence from any particular
manufacturing interest(s), testing or simulation lab(s), or independent certifying organization(s).
11. The entity shall provide or authorize the use of labels and label certificates for Component Modeling
Approach and site-built fenestration products that can be used to meet the requirements of Sections
12. The entity's certification program shall allow for multiple participants in each aspect of the program to
provide for competition between manufacturers, testing labs, simulation labs, and independent certifying
(e) Certification for Other Factors. Nothing in this section shall preclude any entity, whether associated with a U-
factor, SHGC or VT certification program or not, from providing certification services relating to factors other
than U-factors, SHGCs and VTs for fenestration products and exterior doors.
10-111 – CERTIFICATION AND LABELING OF FENESTRATION PRODUCT AND EXTERIOR DOOR U-
FACTORS, SOLAR HEAT GAIN COEFFICIENTS, VISIBLE TRANSMITTANCE AND AIR LEAKAGE
2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards Page 39
10-112 – CRITERIA FOR DEFAULT TABLES
(a) The Commission shall maintain tables of default U-factors and SHGCs for use as an alternative to U-factors and
SHGCs derived based on the NFRC Rating Procedure. The default values shall meet the following criteria:
1. The values shall be derived from simulations of products using the same computer simulation program(s)
used in the NFRC Rating Procedure.
2. The default values shall be set so that they do not provide to any significant number of products a lower U-
factor or SHGC than those products would obtain if they were rated using the full NFRC Rating Procedure.
(b) The Commission shall periodically review and revise the default tables as necessary to ensure that the criteria
10-112 – CRITERIA FOR DEFAULT TABLES
Page 40 2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards
10-113 – RATING AND LABELING OF ROOFING PRODUCT
This section establishes rules for implementing labeling and rating requirements relating to reflectance and emittance
150.2(b)1H, and 150.2(b)2 of Title 24, California Code of Regulations, Part 6. This section also provides for
designation of the Cool Roof Rating Council (CRRC) as the supervisory entity responsible for administering the
state's rating program for roofing products, provided CRRC meets specified criteria.
Every roofing product installed in construction to take compliance credit or meet the prescriptive requirements
150.2(b)2 shall have a clearly visible packaging label that lists the emittance and the initial and 3-year aged solar
reflectance, or a CRRC Rapid Rating for solar reflectance, tested in accordance with CRRC-1.
Packaging for liquid-applied roof coatings shall state the product meets the requirements specified in Section
Every roofing product installed in construction to take compliance credit or meet the prescriptive requirements
150.2(b)2 shall be rated by CRRC or another supervisory entity approved by the Commission pursuant to
(c) Designation of Supervisory Entity. The CRRC shall be the supervisory entity to administer the rating program
relating to reflectance and emittance ratings for roofing products, provided the Commission determines that the
CRRC meets the criteria in Section 10-113(d).
1. The Commission may consider designating a supervisory entity other than CRRC if the Commission
determines that the CRRC is not meeting the criteria in Section 10-113(d). Such other supervisory entity
shall meet the criteria in Section 10-113(d) prior to being designated.
2. The Commission shall periodically review, at least annually, the structure and operations of the supervisory
entity to ensure continuing compliance with the criteria in Section 10-113(d). The supervisory entity shall
provide an annual report to the Commission explaining all of the measures it has taken to comply with the
1. Membership in the entity shall be open on a nondiscriminatory basis to any person or organization that has
an interest in uniform performance ratings for roofing products, including, but not limited to, members of
the roofing industry, building industry, design professionals, specifiers, utilities, government agencies, and
public interest organizations. The membership shall be composed of a broad cross section of those
interested in uniform thermal performance ratings for roofing products.
2. The governing body of the entity shall reflect a reasonable cross-section of the interests represented by the
3. The entity shall maintain a program of oversight of product manufacturers, laboratories, and independent
certifying organizations that ensures uniform application of the CRRC testing and rating procedures,
labeling and rating, and such other rating procedures for other factors that improves the accuracy of
properties of roofing products affecting energy performance as the CRRC and the Commission may adopt.
4. The entity shall require manufacturers and independent certifying organizations within its program to use
only laboratories accredited by the supervisory entity to perform tests in accordance with CRRC-1.
5. The entity shall maintain appropriate guidelines for testing laboratories and manufacturers, including
10-113 – RATING AND LABELING OF ROOFING PRODUCT REFLECTANCE AND EMITTANCE
2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards Page 41
E. Periodic review including but not limited to, blind testing by laboratories; inspections of products; and
inspections of laboratories and manufacturing facilities;
G. Guidelines to maintain the integrity of the program, including, but not limited to, provisions to avoid
conflicts of interest within the rating process.
6. The entity shall be a nonprofit organization and shall maintain reasonable, nondiscriminatory fee schedules
for the services it provides, and shall make its fee schedules, the financial information on which fees are
based, and financial statements available to its members for inspection.
7. The entity shall provide hearing processes that give laboratories, manufacturers and certifying agencies a
fair review of decisions that adversely affect them.
8. The entity shall maintain a policy committee or similar body whose procedures are designed to avoid
conflicts of interest in deciding appeals, resolving disputes and setting policy for the certifying
9. The entity shall publish at least annually a directory of rated products and products that are no longer rated
10. The entity itself shall be free from conflict-of-interest ties or to undue influence from any particular roofing
product manufacturing interest(s), testing or independent certifying organization(s).
11. The entity shall provide or authorize the use of labels that can be used to meet the requirements for showing
12. The entity's rating program shall allow for multiple participants in each aspect of the program to provide for
competition between manufacturers and between testing labs.
10-113 – RATING AND LABELING OF ROOFING PRODUCT REFLECTANCE AND EMITTANCE
Page 42 2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards
10-114 – DETERMINATION OF OUTDOOR LIGHTING ZONES AND
ADMINISTRATIVE RULES FOR USE
This section establishes rules for implementing outdoor lighting zones to show compliance with Section 140.7 of
Title 24, California Code of Regulations, Part 6.
(a) Lighting Zones. Exterior lighting allowances in California vary by Lighting Zones (LZ).
(b) Lighting Zone Characteristics. TABLE 10-114-A specifies the relative ambient illumination level and the
statewide default location for each lighting zone.
(c) Amending the Lighting Zone Designation. A local jurisdiction may officially adopt changes to the lighting
zone designation of an area by following a public process that allows for formal public notification, review, and
comment about the proposed change. The local jurisdiction may determine areas where Lighting Zone 4 is
applicable and may increase or decrease the lighting zones for areas that are in State Default Lighting Zones 1, 2
(d) Commission Notification, Amended Outdoor Lighting Zone Designation. Local jurisdictions who adopt
changes to the State Default Lighting Zones shall notify the Commission by providing the following materials to
1. A detailed specification of the boundaries of the adopted Lighting Zones, consisting of the county name, the
city name if any, the zip code(s) of the redesignated areas, and a description of the physical boundaries
2. A description of the public process that was conducted in adopting the Lighting Zone changes; and
3. An explanation of how the adopted Lighting Zone changes are consistent with the specifications of
(e) The Commission shall have the authority to not allow Lighting Zone changes which the Commission finds to be
inconsistent with the specifications of Section 10-114.
10-114 – DETERMINATION OF OUTDOOR LIGHTING ZONES AND ADMINISTRATIVE RULES FOR USE
2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards Page 43
TABLE 10-114-A LIGHTING ZONE CHARACTERISTICS AND RULES FOR AMENDMENTS BY LOCAL
Zone Ambient State wide Default Location Moving Up to Higher Zones Moving Down to
Very Low and wildlife preserves can be Not applicable
are contained within such a zone.
preserves. Those that are wholly
Low wildlife preserve, can be designated Not applicable.
lighting zone may be considered
by the local government as part
Special districts within a default government designated
LZ2 zone may be designated as parks within a default
Moderate Examples include special designated as LZ1 by
commercial districts or areas with the local jurisdiction for
special security considerations lower illumination
located within a rural area. standards, without any
LZ3 Special districts within a default Special districts and
LZ3 may be designated as a LZ4 government designated
by local jurisdiction for high parks within a default
Urban areas, as defined by the intensity nighttime use, such as LZ3 zone may be
districts or areas with special LZ2 by the local
security considerations requiring jurisdiction, without any
very high light levels. size limits.
10-114 – DETERMINATION OF OUTDOOR LIGHTING ZONES AND ADMINISTRATIVE RULES FOR USE
Page 44 2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards
10-115 – COMMUNITY SHARED SOLAR ELECTRIC GENERATION
SYSTEM OR COMMUNITY SHARED BATTERY STORAGE SYSTEM
COMPLIANCE OPTION FOR ON-SITE SOLAR ELECTRIC
GENERATION OR BATTERY STORAGE REQUIREMENTS
(a) Community Shared Solar Electric Generation System or Battery Storage System Offset. A community
shared solar system, other community shared renewable system, community shared battery storage system, or
combination of the aforementioned systems (hereinafter referred to as a community shared solar or battery
storage system) may be approved by the Commission as a compliance option to partially or totally meet the on-
site solar electric generation system and/or battery storage system that is otherwise required by Section
150.1(b)1 of Title 24, California Code of Regulations, Part 6. To be approved the community shared solar
electric generation or community shared battery storage system shall meet the following requirements.
1. Enforcement Agency. The community shared solar electric generation system and/or community shared
battery storage system shall be installed and available for enforcement agency site inspection, no later than
the point in time the enforcement agency must physically verify compliance of the building, which would
otherwise be required to have an on-site solar electric generation and/or battery storage system, and shall
not cause delay in the process of enforcement agency review and approval of that building. The
enforcement agency shall have jurisdiction and facilitated access to make site inspections. All
documentation for the community solar electric generation system and/or community solar battery storage
system that is required to demonstrate compliance for the building shall be completed prior to building
2. Energy Performance. The community shared solar electric generation system and/or community shared
battery storage system shall be demonstrated to provide the same or better energy performance equal to the
partial or total compliance with the energy performance of the on-site solar electric generation and/or
battery storage system that would otherwise have been required for the building, computed by compliance
software certified for use by the Commission.
3. Dedicated Building Energy Savings Benefits. The community shared solar electric generation system
and/or community shared battery storage system shall provide energy saving benefits directly to the
building that would otherwise have been required to have an on-site solar electric generation system and/or
battery storage system. The energy savings benefits shall be allocated from the total resource of the
community shared solar electric generation system and/or community shared battery storage system in a
manner demonstrated to be equivalent to the reductions in energy consumption that would have resulted
from the on-site solar electric generation system and/or battery storage system that is otherwise required by
Section 150.1 of Title 24. The energy savings benefits allocated to the building shall be in the form of:
A. actual reductions in the energy consumption of the dedicated building;
B. utility energy reduction credits that will result in virtual reductions in the building’s energy
consumption that is subject to energy bill payments; or
C. payments to the building that will have an equivalent effect as energy bill reductions.
The reduction in the building’s energy bill resulting from A, B, or C above shall be greater than the added
cost to the building resulting from the building’s share in the community shared solar or battery system.
4. Durability. The community shared solar electric generation system and/or community shared battery
storage system shall be designed and installed to provide the energy savings benefits to the dedicated
building specified in Section 10-115(a)3 for a period of no less than twenty (20) years.
5. Additionality. The community shared solar electric generation system and/or community shared battery
storage system shall provide the energy savings benefits specified in Section 10-115(a)3 exclusively to the
dedicated building. Those energy savings benefits shall in no way be attributed to other purposes or
6. Accountability and Recordkeeping. Applicants for Commission approval of community shared solar
electric generation systems and/or community shared battery storage systems shall be accountable to all
10-115 – COMMUNITY SHARED SOLAR ELECTRIC GENERATION SYSTEM OR COMMUNITY SHARED
BATTERY STORAGE SYSTEM COMPLIANCE OPTION FOR ON-SITE SOLAR ELECTRIC GENERATION OR
2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards Page 45
parties who relied on these systems for partial or total compliance with the on-site solar electric generation
and/or battery storage system that would otherwise be required, including but not limited to builders of the
buildings, owners of the buildings, enforcement agencies, and the Commission. Recordkeeping regarding
compliance with the requirements in Sections 10-115(a)1-6 shall be maintained over the period of time
specified in Section 10-115(a)4 for each building for which the community shared solar electric generation
or battery storage system is used to demonstrate partial or total compliance. Access to these records shall be
provided to any entity approved by the Commission for auditing compliance with these requirements.
(b) Application for Commission Approval. Any entity may apply to the Commission for approval to administer a
community shared solar electric generation or community shared battery storage system to provide partial or
total compliance with the on-site solar electric generation system and/or battery storage system required by
Section 150.1 of Title 24, California Code of Regulations, Part 6. The application shall demonstrate to the
Commission’s satisfaction that each of the requirements specified in Section 10-115(a)1-6 will be met and shall
include detailed explanation of the actions that will be taken by the applicant to ensure that each requirement is
met over the period of time specified in Section 10-115(a)4 for each building for which a partial or total offset is
used to demonstrate compliance. All applicants have the burden of proof to establish that their application
should be granted. The Commission shall have the authority to not approve any application that the
Commission determines to be inconsistent with the requirements of Section 10-115.
(c) Commission Approval. Community shared solar electric generation systems and/or community shared battery
storage systems, which demonstrate to the Commission’s satisfaction that all of the requirements specified in
10-115 – COMMUNITY SHARED SOLAR ELECTRIC GENERATION SYSTEM OR COMMUNITY SHARED
BATTERY STORAGE SYSTEM COMPLIANCE OPTION FOR ON-SITE SOLAR ELECTRIC GENERATION OR
Page 46 2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards
10-115 – COMMUNITY SHARED SOLAR ELECTRIC GENERATION SYSTEM OR COMMUNITY SHARED
BATTERY STORAGE SYSTEM COMPLIANCE OPTION FOR ON-SITE SOLAR ELECTRIC GENERATION OR
2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards Page 47
10-115 – COMMUNITY SHARED SOLAR ELECTRIC GENERATION SYSTEM OR COMMUNITY SHARED
BATTERY STORAGE SYSTEM COMPLIANCE OPTION FOR ON-SITE SOLAR ELECTRIC GENERATION OR
Page 48 2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards
10-115 – COMMUNITY SHARED SOLAR ELECTRIC GENERATION SYSTEM OR COMMUNITY SHARED
BATTERY STORAGE SYSTEM COMPLIANCE OPTION FOR ON-SITE SOLAR ELECTRIC GENERATION OR
2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards Page 49
(a) Buildings Covered. The provisions of Part 6 apply to all buildings:
2. For which an application for a building permit or renewal of an existing permit is filed (or is required by
law to be filed) on or after the effective date of the provisions, or which are constructed by a governmental
EXCEPTION 1 to Section 100.0(a): Qualified historic buildings, as regulated by the California Historic
Building Code (Title 24, Part 8). Lighting in qualified historic buildings shall comply with the applicable
EXCEPTION 2 to Section 100.0(a): Building departments, at their discretion, may exempt temporary
buildings, temporary outdoor lighting or temporary lighting in an unconditioned building, or structures erected
in response to a natural disaster. Temporary buildings or structures shall be completely removed upon the
expiration of the time limit stated in the permit.
EXCEPTION 3 to Section 100.0(a): Buildings in Occupancy Group I-3 and I-4.
(b) Parts of Buildings Regulated. The provisions of Part 6 apply to the building envelope, space-conditioning
systems, water-heating systems, pool and spas, solar ready buildings, indoor lighting systems of buildings,
outdoor lighting systems, electrical power distribution systems, and signs located either indoors or outdoors, in
1. All conditioned space in a story shall comply with Part 6 whether or not the story is a habitable space.
2. All unconditioned space in a story shall comply with the lighting requirements of Part 6 whether or not the
(d) Outdoor Lighting and Indoor and Outdoor Signs. The provisions of Part 6 apply to outdoor lighting systems
and to signs located either indoors or outdoors as set forth in TABLE 100.0-A.
(e) Sections Applicable to Particular Buildings. TABLE 100.0-A and this subsection list the provisions of Part 6
that are applicable to different types of buildings covered by Section 100.0(a).
1. All buildings. Sections 100.0 through 110.12 apply to all buildings.
EXCEPTION to Section 100.0(e)1: Spaces or requirements not listed in TABLE 100.0-A.
A. All newly constructed buildings. Sections 110.0 through 110.12 apply to all newly constructed
buildings within the scope of Section 100.0(a). In addition, newly constructed buildings shall meet the
B. Nonresidential, high-rise residential, and hotel/motel buildings that are mechanically heated or
Page 50 2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards
i. Sections applicable. Sections 120.0 through 140.8 apply to newly constructed nonresidential
buildings, high-rise residential buildings, and hotels/motels that are mechanically heated or
ii. Compliance approaches. In order to comply with Part 6, newly constructed nonresidential
buildings, high-rise residential buildings, and hotels/motels that are mechanically heated or
mechanically cooled must meet the requirements of:
a. Mandatory measures: The applicable provisions of Sections 120.0 through 130.5; and
C. Unconditioned nonresidential buildings and process space. Sections 110.9, 110.10, 120.6, 130.0
buildings and 140.1, and 140.3(c), for process spaces within the scope of Section 100.0(a).
i. Sections applicable. Sections 150.0 through 150.1 apply to newly constructed low-rise residential
ii. Compliance approaches. In order to comply with Part 6 newly constructed low-rise residential
buildings must meet the requirements of:
a. Mandatory measures: The applicable provisions of Sections 110.0 through 110.10, and 150.0;
EXCEPTION to Section 100.0(e)2Diib: Seasonally occupied agricultural housing limited by
state or federal agency contract to occupancy not more than 180 days in any calendar year.
i. Sections applicable. Sections 110.2, 120.6 and 140.9 apply to covered processes.
ii. Compliance approaches. In order to comply with Part 6, covered processes must meet the
a. The applicable mandatory measures in Section 120.6; and
(i) The Performance approach requirements of Section 140.1; or
(ii) The Prescriptive approach requirements of Section 140.9.
Note: If covered processes do not have prescriptive requirements, then only the applicable
mandatory measures in Section 120.6 must be met.
3. New construction in existing buildings (additions, alterations and repairs).
A. Nonresidential, high-rise residential, and hotel/motel buildings. Section 141.0 applies to new
construction in existing nonresidential, high-rise residential, and hotel/motel buildings. New
construction in existing buildings includes additions, alterations and repairs. Section 141.0 specifies
requirements that uniquely apply to additions, alterations or repairs to existing buildings, and specify
which requirements in other sections also apply. For alterations that change the occupancy
classification of the building, the requirements specified in Section 141.0 apply to the occupancy after
2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards Page 51
B. Low-rise residential buildings. Section 150.2 applies to new construction in existing low-rise
residential buildings. New construction in existing buildings includes additions, alterations and repairs.
Section 150.2 specifies requirements that uniquely apply to additions, alterations or repairs to existing
buildings, and specify which requirements in other sections also apply. For alterations that change the
occupancy classification of the building, the requirements specified in Section 150.2 apply to the
4. Installation of insulation in existing buildings. Section 110.8(d) applies to buildings in which insulation is
being installed in existing attics, or on existing water heaters, or existing space conditioning ducts.
outdoor lighting systems, and Section 141.0 applies to outdoor lighting that is either added or altered.
6. Signs. Sections 130.0, 130.3 and 140.8 apply to newly constructed signs located either indoors or outdoors
and Section 141.0 applies to sign alterations located either indoors or outdoors.
(f) Mixed Occupancy. When a building is designed and constructed for more than one type of occupancy
(residential and nonresidential), the space for each occupancy shall meet the provisions of Part 6 applicable to
EXCEPTION 1 to Section 100.0(f): If one occupancy constitutes at least 80 percent of the conditioned floor
area of the building, the entire building envelope, HVAC, and water heating may be designed to comply with the
provisions of Part 6 applicable to that occupancy, provided that the applicable lighting requirements in Sections
140.6through 140.8 or 150.0(k) are met for each occupancy and space and mandatory measures in Sections
EXCEPTION 2 to Section 100.0(f): If one occupancy constitutes at least 90 percent of the combined
conditioned plus unconditioned floor area of the building, the entire building indoor lighting may be designed to
comply with only the lighting provisions of Part 6 applicable to that occupancy.
(g) Administrative Requirements. Administrative requirements relating to permit requirements, enforcement by
the Commission, locally adopted energy standards, interpretations, claims of exemption, approved calculation
methods, rights of appeal, and certification and labeling requirements of fenestration products and roofing
products are specified in California Code of Regulations, Title 24, Part 1, Sections 10-101 to 10-114.
(h) Certification Requirements for Manufactured Equipment, Products, and Devices. Part 6 limits the
installation of manufactured equipment, products, and devices to those that have been certified as specified by
sections 110.0 and 110.1. Requirements for manufactured equipment, products, and devices, when not specified
in Title 24 Part 6, are specified in California Code of Regulations, Title 20, Sections 1601-1609.
Page 52 2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards
Occupancies Application Mandatory Prescriptive Performance Additions/Alterations
Nonresidential, high-rise and hotel/motel buildings that contain covered processes may conform to the applicable requirements of both
occupancy types listed in this table.
2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards Page 53
Page 54 2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards
SECTION 100.1 – DEFINITIONS AND RULES OF CONSTRUCTION
1. Where the context requires, the singular includes the plural and the plural includes the singular.
2. The use of "and" in a conjunctive provision means that all elements in the provision must be complied with,
or must exist to make the provision applicable. Where compliance with one or more elements suffices, or
where existence of one or more elements makes the provision applicable, "or" (rather than "and/or") is used.
(b) Definitions. Terms, phrases, words and their derivatives in Part 6 shall be defined as specified in Section 100.1.
Terms, phrases, words and their derivatives not found in Section 100.1 shall be defined as specified in the
“Definitions” chapters of Title 24, Parts 1 through 5 of the California Code of Regulations. Where terms,
phrases, words and their derivatives are not defined in any of the references above, they shall be defined as
specified in Webster's Third New International Dictionary of the English Language, Unabridged (1961 edition,
through the 2002 addenda), unless the context requires otherwise.
AAMA/WDMA/CSA 101/ I.S.2/A440-11 are the American Architectural Manufacturers Association/ Window and
Door Manufacturers Association/ Canadian Standards Association document titled “North American Fenestration
ACCA is the Air Conditioning Contractors of America.
ACCA MANUAL J is the Air Conditioning Contractors of America document titled “Manual J - Residential Load
ACCEPTANCE REQUIREMENTS FOR CODE COMPLIANCE is a description of test procedures in the
Reference Nonresidential Appendices that includes equipment and systems to be tested, functions to be tested,
conditions under which the test shall be performed, the scope of the tests, results to be obtained, and measurable
ACCESSIBLE is having access thereto, but which first may require removal or opening of access panels, doors, or
ADDITION is any change to a building that increases conditioned floor area and conditioned volume. See also
“newly conditioned space.” Addition is also any change that increases the floor area and volume of an unconditioned
building of an occupancy group or type regulated by Part 6. Addition is also any change that increases the
illuminated area of an outdoor lighting application regulated by Part 6.
ADIABATIC PAD is a material located before the heat transfer surface of an adiabatic condenser, which precools
the ambient air by becoming fully wetted during precool mode operation.
AGRICULTURAL BUILDING is a structure designed and constructed to house farm implements, hay, grain,
poultry, livestock or other horticultural products. It is not a structure that is a place of human habitation, a place of
employment where agricultural products are processed, treated or packaged, or a place used by the public.
AIR BARRIER is a combination of interconnected materials and assemblies joined and sealed together to provide a
continuous barrier to air leakage through the building envelope that separates conditioned from unconditioned space,
or that separates adjoining conditioned spaces of different occupancies or uses.
AIR CONDITIONER is an appliance that supplies cooled and dehumidified air to a space for the purpose of
cooling objects within the space.
AIR-COOLED AIR CONDITIONER is an air conditioner using an air-cooled condenser.
AIR-HANDLING UNIT or AIR HANDLER is a blower or fan that distributes supply air to a room, space, or area.
AIR FILTER, AIR FILTER EQUIPMENT, or AIR FILTER DEVICE is air-cleaning equipment used for
removing particulate matter from the air.
AIR FILTER MEDIA is the part of the air filter equipment which is the actual particulate removing agent.
SECTION 100.1 – DEFINITIONS AND RULES OF CONSTRUCTION
2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards Page 55
AIR-TO-AIR HEAT EXCHANGER is a device which will reduce the heat losses or gains that occur when a
building is mechanically ventilated, by transferring heat between the conditioned air being exhausted and outside air
AIR-SOURCE HEAT PUMP is an appliance that consists of one or more factory-made assemblies, that includes
an indoor conditioning coil, a compressor, and a refrigerant-to-air heat exchanger, and that provides heating and
ALTERATION is any change to a building's water-heating system, space-conditioning system, lighting system,
electrical power distribution system, or envelope that is not an addition. Alteration is also any change that is
regulated by Part 6 to an outdoor lighting system that is not an addition. Alteration is also any change that is
regulated by Part 6 to signs located either indoors or outdoors. Alteration is also any change that is regulated by Part
6 to a covered process that is not an addition. (See also “fenestration alteration”.)
ALTERED COMPONENT is a component that has undergone an alteration.
ALTERNATIVE CALCULATION METHODS (ACM) are compliance softwares, or alternative component
packages, or exceptional methods approved by the Commission under Section 10-109. ACMs are also referred to as
ALTERNATIVE CALCULATION METHODS (ACM) APPROVAL MANUAL are the documents establishing
the requirements for Energy Commission approval of Compliance Software used to demonstrate compliance with the
Building Energy Efficiency Standards for Residential and Nonresidential Buildings currently adopted by the Energy
ANNUAL FUEL UTILIZATION EFFICIENCY (AFUE) is a measure of the percentage of heat from the
combustion of gas or oil which is transferred to the space being heated during a year, as determined using the
applicable test method in the Appliance Efficiency Regulations or Section 110.2.
ANNUNCIATED is a type of visual signaling device that indicates the on, off, or other status of a loadANSI is the
ANSI C82.6-2015 is the American National Standards Institute document titled “Ballasts for High-Intensity
ANSI/AMCA STANDARD 500-D is the American National Standards Institute / Air Movement and Control
Association document titled “Laboratory Methods of Testing Dampers For Rating”. (ANSI/AMCA 500-D-2012)
ANSI/IES RP-16-17 is the document coauthored by the American National Standards Institute and the Illuminating
Engineering Society of North America, Recommended Practice titled "Nomenclature and Definitions for
ANSI Z21.10.3 is the American National Standards Institute document titled “Gas Water Heaters - Volume III,
ANSI Z21.13 is the American National Standards Institute document titled “Gas-Fired Low Pressure Steam and Hot
ANSI Z21.40.4A is the American National Standards Institute document titled “Addenda 1 to ANSI Z21.40.4-
1996/CGA 2.94-M96, Performance Testing and Rating of Gas-Fired, Air Conditioning and Heat Pump Appliances,”
ANSI Z21.47 is the American National Standards Institute document titled “Gas-Fired Central Furnaces,”
ANSI Z83.8 is the American National Standards Institute document titled “American National Standard/CSA
Standard For Gas Unit Heaters, Gas Packaged Heaters, Gas Utility Heaters and Gas-Fired Duct Furnaces,” 2016
ANSI Z9.5 is the American National Standards Institute document titled “Laboratory Ventilation,” 2012
APPLIANCE EFFICIENCY REGULATIONS are the regulations in Title 20, Sections 1601 et seq. of the
SECTION 100.1 – DEFINITIONS AND RULES OF CONSTRUCTION
Page 56 2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards
APPROVED CALCULATION METHOD (See “alternative calculation methods”)
AHRI is the Air-Conditioning, Heating, and Refrigeration Institute.
AHRI 210/240 is the Air-Conditioning, Heating, and Refrigeration Institute document titled “Performance Rating of
Unitary Air-Conditioning and Air-Source Heat Pump Equipment,” 2008 (ANSI/AHRI Standard 210/240-2008 with
ANSI/AHRI/CSA 310/380 is the Air-Conditioning, Heating, and Refrigeration Institute document titled “Standard
for Packaged Terminal Air-Conditioners and Heat Pumps (CSA-C744-17),” 2004 (ANSI/AHRI/CSA Standard
AHRI 320 is the Air-Conditioning, Heating, and Refrigeration Institute document titled “Water-Source Heat
AHRI 325 is the Air-Conditioning, Heating, and Refrigeration Institute document titled “Ground Water-Source Heat
ANSI/AHRI 340/360 is the Air-Conditioning, Heating, and Refrigeration Institute document titled “Performance
Rating of Commercial and Industrial Unitary Air-Conditioning and Heat Pump Equipment,” 2015 (ANSI/AHRI
ANSI/AHRI 365 is the Air-Conditioning, Heating, and Refrigeration Institute document titled "Commercial and
Industrial Unitary Air-Conditioning Condensing Units," 2009 (ANSI/AHRI Standard 365 (I-P)-2009).
ANSI/AHRI 390 is the Air-Conditioning, Heating, and Refrigeration Institute document titled "Performance Rating
of Single Package Vertical Air-Conditioners and Heat Pumps," 2003 (ANSI/AHRI Standard 390 (I-P)-2003).
ANSI/AHRI 400 is the Air-Conditioning, Heating, and Refrigeration Institute document titled "Liquid to Liquid
ANSI/AHRI 460 is the Air-Conditioning, Heating, and Refrigeration Institute document titled “Performance Rating
of Remote Mechanical-Draft Air-Cooled Refrigerant Condensers,” 2005 (ANSI/AHRI Standard 460-2005).
AHRI 550/590 is the Air-Conditioning, Heating, and Refrigeration Institute document titled “Performance Rating of
Water Chilling Packages Using the Vapor Compression Cycle,” 2015 (AHRI Standard 550/590-(I-P)-2015) with
ANSI/AHRI 560 is the Air-Conditioning, Heating, and Refrigeration Institute document titled “Absorption Water
Chilling and Water Heating Packages,” 2000 (ANSI/AHRI Standard 560-2000).
AHRI 680 is the Air-Conditioning, Heating, and Refrigeration Institute document titled “Performance Rating of
Residential Air Filter Equipment,” 2017 (ANSI/AHRI Standard 680-2017).
AHRI 1230 is the Air-Conditioning, Heating, and Refrigeration Institute document titled “Performance Rating of
Variable Refrigerant Flow (VRF) Multi-Split Air-Conditioning and Heat Pump Equipment,” 2014 (AHRI Standard
AIR, AVAILABLE TRANSFER is that portion of total outdoor ventilation air that is not required to satisfy other
exhaust needs or to maintain pressurization of other spaces and that is transferable according to Section 120.1(g).
AIR, INFILTRATION is outdoor air that enters a building or space through openings in the building or space
envelope due to negative pressure in the space or building relative to the exterior of the building envelope.
AIR, MAKEUP is outdoor air that is intentionally conveyed by openings or ducts into the building from the outside;
is supplied to the vicinity of an exhaust hood; and replaces air, vapor and contaminants being exhausted by the
exhaust hood. Makeup air is generally filtered and fan-forced, and it may be heated or cooled. Makeup air may be
delivered through openings or ducts integral to the exhaust hood.
AIR, REPLACEMENT is air that is used to replace air removed from a building through an exhaust system.
Replacement air may be derived from one or more of the following: makeup air, portions of supply air, transfer air,
AIR, SUPPLY is air entering a space from an air-conditioning, heating, or ventilating system for the purpose of
comfort conditioning. Supply air is generally filtered, fan-forced, and heated, cooled, humidified or dehumidified as
necessary to maintain specified temperature and humidity conditions.
SECTION 100.1 – DEFINITIONS AND RULES OF CONSTRUCTION
2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards Page 57
AIR, TRANSFER is air transferred, whether actively by fans or passively by pressure differentials, from one room
to another within a building through openings in the room envelope.
ASHRAE is the American Society of Heating, Refrigerating, and Air-conditioning Engineers.
ASHRAE CLIMATIC DATA FOR REGION × is the American Society of Heating, Refrigerating and Air-
Conditioning Engineers document titled "ASHRAE Climatic Data for Region X, Arizona, California, Hawaii and
ASHRAE HANDBOOK, APPLICATIONS VOLUME is the American Society of Heating, Refrigerating and Air-
Conditioning Engineers document titled "ASHRAE Handbook: Heating, Ventilating, and Air-Conditioning
ASHRAE HANDBOOK, EQUIPMENT VOLUME is the American Society of Heating, Refrigerating and Air-
Conditioning Engineers document titled "ASHRAE Handbook: Heating, Ventilating, and Air-Conditioning Systems
ASHRAE HANDBOOK, FUNDAMENTALS VOLUME is the American Society of Heating, Refrigerating and
Air-Conditioning Engineers document titled "ASHRAE Handbook: Fundamentals" (2017).
ASHRAE STANDARD 52.2 is the American Society of Heating, Refrigerating and Air-Conditioning Engineers
document titled "Method of Testing General Ventilation Air-Cleaning Devices for Removal Efficiency by Particle
ASHRAE STANDARD 55 is the American Society of Heating, Refrigerating and Air-Conditioning Engineers
document titled " Thermal Environmental Conditions for Human Occupancy,” 2017 (ASHRAE Standard 55-2017).
ASHRAE STANDARD 62.1 is the American Society of Heating, Refrigerating and Air-Conditioning Engineers
document titled “Ventilation for Acceptable Indoor Air Quality”, 2016 (ANSI/ASHRAE Standard 62.1-2016,
ASHRAE STANDARD 62.2 is the American Society of Heating, Refrigerating and Air-Conditioning Engineers
document titled "Ventilation and Acceptable Indoor Air Quality in Residential Buildings,” 2016 (ANSI/ASHRAE
Standard 62.2-2016 including ANSI/ASHRAE Addenda b, d, l, q, and s to ANSI/ASHRAE 62.2-2016 published in
ASHRAE STANDARD 193 is the American Society of Heating, Refrigerating and Air-Conditioning Engineers
document titled "Method of Test for Determining the Airtightness of HVAC Equipment," RA2014 (ANSI/ASHRAE
ASME is the American Society of Mechanical Engineers.
ASME A17.1/CSA B44 is the American Society of Mechanical Engineers document titled “Handbook on Safety
Code for Elevators and Escalators” 2016 (ASME Standard A17.1/CSAB44-2016).
ASME A112.18.1/CSA B125.1 is the American Society of Mechanical Engineers document titled “Plumbing
ASTM is the American Society for Testing and Materials International.
ASTM C55 is the American Society for Testing and Materials document titled “Standard Specification for Concrete
ASTM C177 is the American Society for Testing and Materials document titled “Standard Test Method for Steady-
State Heat Flux Measurements and Thermal Transmission Properties by Means of the Guarded-Hot-Plate
ASTM C272 is the American Society for Testing and Materials document titled “Standard Test Method for Water
Absorption of Core Materials for Structural Sandwich Constructions,” 2016 (ASTM C272-16).
ASTM C335/C335M is the American Society for Testing and Materials document titled “Standard Test Method for
Steady-State Heat Transfer Properties of Pipe Insulation,” 2017 (ASTM C335/C335M-17).
ASTM C518 is the American Society for Testing and Materials document titled “Standard Test Method for Steady-
State Thermal Transmission Properties by Means of the Heat Flow Meter Apparatus,” 2017 (ASTM C518-17).
SECTION 100.1 – DEFINITIONS AND RULES OF CONSTRUCTION
Page 58 2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards
ASTM C731 is the American Society for Testing and Materials document titled “Standard Test Method for
Extrudability, After Package Aging of Latex Sealants,” 2015 (ASTM C731-15).
ASTM C732 is the American Society for Testing and Materials document titled “Standard Test Method for Aging
Effects of Artificial Weathering on Latex Sealants,” 2017 (ASTM C732-17 (2017).
ASTM C836 is the American Society of Testing and Materials document titled, “Standard Specification for High
Solids Content, Cold Liquid-Applied Elastomeric Waterproofing Membrane for Use with Separate Wearing Course,”
ASTM C1167 is the American Society for Testing and Materials document titled “Standard Specification for Clay
ASTM C1371 is the American Society for Testing and Materials document titled “Standard Test Method for
Determination of Emittance of Materials Near Room Temperature Using Portable Emissometers,” 2015 (ASTM
ASTM C1492 is the American Society for Testing and Materials document entitled “Standard Specification for
ASTM C1549 is the American Society for Testing and Materials document entitled, "Standard Test Method for
Determination of Solar Reflectance Near Ambient Temperature Using a Portable Solar Reflectometer,"2016 (ASTM
ASTM C1583 is the American Society of Testing and Materials document titled, “Standard Test Method for Tensile
Strength of Concrete Surfaces and the Bond Strength or Tensile Strength of Concrete Repair and Overlay Materials
ASTM D448 is the American Society for Testing and Materials document titled, "Standard Classification for Sizes
of Aggregate for Road and Bridge Construction,"2017 (ASTM D448-12(2017)).
ASTM D522 is the American Society of Testing and Materials document titled, “Standard Test Methods for
Mandrel Bend Test of Attached Organic Coatings,” 2017 (ASTM D522/D522M-17).
ASTM D822 is the American Society of Testing and Materials document titled, “Standard Practice for Filtered
Open-Flame Carbon-Arc Exposures of Paint and Related Coatings,” 2013 (ASTM D822/D822M-13).
ASTM D1003 is the American Society for Testing and Materials document titled “Standard Test Method for Haze
and Luminous Transmittance of Transparent Plastics,” 2013 (ANSI/ASTM D1003-13).
ASTM D1653 is the American Society of Testing and Materials document titled, “Standard Test Methods for Water
Vapor Transmission of Organic Coating Films,” 2013 (ASTM D1653-13).
ASTM D1863 is the American Society for Testing and Materials document titled, "Standard Specification for
ASTM D2370 is the American Society of Testing and Materials document titled, “Standard Test Method for Tensile
ASTM D2824 is the American Society of Testing and Materials document titled “Standard Specification for
Aluminum-Pigmented Asphalt Roof Coatings, Nonfibered, Asbestos Fibered, and Fibered without Asbestos,” 2013
ASTM D3468 is the American Society of Testing and Materials document titled, “Standard Specification for Liquid-
Applied Neoprene and Chlorosulfonated Polyethylene Used in Roofing and Waterproofing,” 2013 (ASTM
ASTM D3805 is the American Society of Testing and Materials document titled “Standard Guide for Application of
ASTM D4798 is the American Society for Testing and Materials document titled “Standard Test Method for
Accelerated Weathering Test Conditions and Procedures for Bituminous Materials (Xenon-Arc Method),” 2016
ASTM D5870 is the American Society of Testing and Materials document titled, “Standard Practice for Calculating
SECTION 100.1 – DEFINITIONS AND RULES OF CONSTRUCTION
2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards Page 59
ASTM D6694 is the American Society of Testing and Materials document titled, “Standard Specification for Liquid-
Applied Silicone Coating Used in Spray Polyurethane Foam Roofing,” 2015 (ASTM D6694/D6694M-15 (2015).
ASTM E96 is the American Society for Testing and Materials document titled “Standard Test Methods for Water
ASTM E283 is the American Society for Testing and Materials document titled “Standard Test Method for
Determining the Rate of Air Leakage Through Exterior Windows, Curtain Walls, and Doors Under Specified
ASTM E408 is the American Society for Testing and Materials document titled, “Standard Test Methods for Total
Normal Emittance of Surfaces Using Inspection-Meter Techniques,” 2013 (ASTM E408-13).
ASTM E779 is the American Society for Testing and Materials document titled, “Standard Test Method for
Determining Air Leakage Rate by Fan Pressurization,” 2010 (ASTM E779-10).
ASTM E903 is the American Society for Testing and Materials document titled, "Standard Test Method for Solar
Absorptance, Reflectance, and Transmittance of Materials Using Integrating Spheres,"2012 (ASTM E903-12(2012)).
ASTM E972 is the American Society for Testing and Materials document titled, "Standard Test Method for Solar
Photometric Transmittance of Sheet Materials Using Sunlight,"1996 (ASTM E972-96(2013)).
ASTM E1175 is the American Society for Testing and Materials document titled, "Standard Test Method for
Determining Solar or Photopic Reflectance, Transmittance, and Absorptance of Materials Using a Large Diameter
ASTM E1677 is the American Society for Testing and Materials document titled, “Standard Specification for an Air
Retarder (AR) Material or System for Low-Rise Framed Building Walls,” 2011 (ASTM E1677-11).
ASTM E1918 is the American Society for Testing and Materials document entitled, "Standard Test Method for
Measuring Solar reflectance of Horizontal and Low-Sloped Surfaces in the Field,"2016 (ASTM E1918-16(2016)).
ASTM E1980 is the American Society for Testing and Materials document titled, “Standard Practice for Calculating
Solar Reflectance Index of Horizontal and Low-Sloped Opaque Surface,” 2011 (ASTM E1980-11).
ASTM E2178 is the American Society for Testing and Materials document titled, "Standard Test Method for Air
ASTM E2357 is the American Society for Testing and Materials document titled, "Standard Test Method for
determining air leakage of air barrier assemblies" 2017 (ASTM E2357-17).
ATTIC is an enclosed space directly below the roof deck and above the ceiling beams.
AUTOMATIC is capable of operating without human intervention.
AUTOMATED TELLER MACHINE (ATM) is any electronic information processing device which accepts or
dispenses currency in connection with a credit, deposit, or convenience account without involvement by a clerk.
BACK-UP COMPRESSORS are those compressors not used to meet peak compressed air loads. Back-up
compressors are physically connected to the compressed air piping system and can be automatically controlled to
turn on if one of the online compressors fails. Back-up compressors do not normally operate.
BATTERY SYSTEM, STATIONARY STORAGE. A rechargeable energy storage system consisting of
electrochemical storage batteries, battery chargers, controls, and associated electrical equipment designed to provide
electrical power to a building. The system is typically used to provide standby or emergency power, and
uninterruptable power supply, load shedding, load sharing or similar capabilities.
BELOW-GRADE WALL is the portion of a wall, enclosing conditioned space that is below the grade line.
BUBBLE POINT is the liquid saturation temperature of a refrigerant at a specified pressure.
BUILDING is any structure or space covered by Section 100.0 of the Building Energy Efficiency Standards.
BUILDING COMMISSIONING is a systematic quality assurance process that spans the entire design and
construction process, including verifying and documenting that building systems and components are planned,
designed, installed, tested, operated and maintained to meet the owner’s project requirements.
SECTION 100.1 – DEFINITIONS AND RULES OF CONSTRUCTION
Page 60 2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards
BUILDING ENVELOPE is the ensemble of exterior and demising partitions of a building that enclose conditioned
CALL CENTER is a phone center that handles large number of phone calls including but not limited to help desk,
customer and sales support, technical support, emergency response, telephone answering service, and inbound and
CASCADE REFRIGERATION SYSTEM is a type of refrigeration system that uses a low-stage refrigeration
system where the heat rejected from condensing the low-stage refrigerant is absorbed using a heat-exchanger by a
separate high-stage refrigeration system, and the ultimate heat rejection to ambient air is accomplished by the high-
CERTIFIED TO THE ENERGY COMMISSION means, when used in association with appliances, certified
under Section 1606 of Title 20 of the California Code of Regulations; and otherwise means certified by the
manufacturer in a declaration, executed under penalty of perjury under the laws of the State of California, that all the
information provided pursuant to the certification is true, complete, accurate and in compliance with all applicable
provisions of Part 6; and if applicable that the equipment, product, or device was tested under the applicable test
CERTIFYING ORGANIZATION is an independent organization recognized by the Commission to certify
manufactured devices for performance values in accordance with procedures adopted by the Commission.
CIE 13.3 is the International Commission on Illumination (Commission Internationale de l’Eclairage) document
titled “Method of Measuring and Specifying Colour Rendering Properties of Light Sources,” 1995 (CIE 13.3-1995).
CIE 15 is the International Commission on Illumination (Commission Internationale de l’Eclairage) document titled
CLIMATE ZONES are the 16 geographic areas of California for which the Commission has established typical
weather data, prescriptive packages and energy budgets. Climate zones are defined by ZIP code and listed in
Reference Joint Appendix JA2. FIGURE 100.1-A is an approximate map of the 16 Climate Zones.
CLOSED-CIRCUIT COOLING TOWER is a cooling tower that utilizes indirect contact between a heated fluid,
typically water or glycol, and the cooling atmosphere to transfer the source heat load through sensible heat, latent
heat, and mass transfer indirectly to the air, essentially combining a heat exchanger and cooling tower into an
integrated and relatively compact device.
CODES, CALIFORNIA HISTORICAL BUILDING CODE is the California Historical Building Code,
California Code of Regulations, Title 24, Part 8 and Part 2 (Chapter 34).
CODES, CBC is the 2016 California Building Code.
CODES, CEC is the 2016 California Electrical Code.
CODES, CMC is the 2016 California Mechanical Code.
CODES, CPC is the 2016 California Plumbing Code.
COEFFICIENT OF PERFORMANCE (COP), COOLING is the ratio of the rate of net heat removal to the rate
of total energy input, calculated under designated operating conditions and expressed in consistent units, as
determined using the applicable test method in the Appliance Efficiency Regulations or Section 110.2.
COEFFICIENT OF PERFORMANCE (COP), HEATING is the ratio of the rate of net heat output to the rate of
total energy input, calculated under designated operating conditions and expressed in consistent units, as determined
using the applicable test method in the Appliance Efficiency Regulations or Section 110.2.
COEFFICIENT OF PERFORMANCE (COP), HEAT PUMP is the ratio of the rate of useful heat output
delivered by the complete heat pump unit (exclusive of supplementary heating) to the corresponding rate of energy
input, in consistent units and as determined using the applicable test method in Appliance Efficiency Regulations or
COMBUSTION AIR POSITIVE SHUT-OFF is a means of restricting airflow through a boiler combustion
chamber during standby periods, used to reduce standby heat loss. A flue damper and a vent damper are two
examples of combustion air positive shut-off devices.
SECTION 100.1 – DEFINITIONS AND RULES OF CONSTRUCTION
2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards Page 61
COMBUSTION EFFICIENCY is a measure of the percentage of heat from the combustion of gas or oil that is
transferred to the medium being heated or lost as jacket loss.
COMMERCIAL BOILER is a type of boiler with a capacity (rated maximum input) of 300,000 Btus per hour
(Btu/h) or more and serving a space heating or water heating load in a commercial building.
COMMISSION is the California State Energy Resources Conservation and Development Commission, which is
also referred to as the California Energy Commission.
COMPLEX MECHANICAL SYSTEMS are systems that include 1) fan systems each serving multiple
thermostatically controlled zones; or 2) built-up air handler systems (nonunitary or nonpackaged HVAC equipment);
or 3) hydronic or steam heating systems; or 4) hydronic cooling systems. Complex mechanical systems are NOT the
one zone, or 2) two-pipe, heating only systems serving one or more zones.
COMPLIANCE SOFTWARE is software that has been approved pursuant to Section 10-109 of Part 1 of Title 24
of the California Code of Regulations, to demonstrate compliance with the performance approach of Part 6.
COMPRESSED AIR SYSTEM is a system of at least one compressor providing compressed air at 40 psig or
COMPUTER ROOM is a room within a building whose primary function is to house electronic equipment and that
has a design equipment power density exceeding 20 watts/ft2 (215 watts/m2) of conditioned floor area.
CONDENSER is a refrigeration component that condenses refrigerant vapor by rejecting heat to air mechanically
circulated over its heat transfer surface.
CONDENSER, ADIABATIC is a condenser that has the ability to use two heat transfer processes in series as
accomplished by a single factory-made unit. The first heat transfer process is the precooling of the entering air by
lowering the entering air drybulb temperature. The second heat transfer process is forced-air circulation cooling over
the heat transfer surface of the condenser.
DRY MODE is an operating condition of an adiabatic condenser wherein the only means of heat transfer is
accomplished through forced-air circulation over the heat transfer surface of the condenser without any
PRECOOL MODE is an operating condition of an adiabatic condenser wherein the entering air is precooled.
CONDENSER SPECIFIC EFFICIENCY is the full load condenser Total Heat of Rejection (THR) capacity at
standardized conditions divided by the fan input electric power (including but not limited to spray pump electric
input power for evaporative condensers) at 100 percent rated fan speed.
CONDITIONED FLOOR AREA (CFA) is the floor area (in square feet) of enclosed conditioned space on all
floors of a building, as measured at the floor level of the exterior surfaces of exterior walls enclosing the conditioned
CONDITIONED SPACE is an enclosed space within a building that is directly conditioned or indirectly
CONDITIONED SPACE, DIRECTLY is an enclosed space that is provided with wood heating, mechanical
heating that has a capacity exceeding 10 Btu/hr-ft², or mechanical cooling that has a capacity exceeding 5 Btu/hr-ft², .
Directly conditioned space does not include process space. (See “process space.”)
CONDITIONED SPACE, INDIRECTLY is enclosed space that (1) is not directly conditioned space; and (2)
either (a) has a thermal transmittance area product (UA) to directly conditioned space exceeding that to the outdoors
or to unconditioned space and does not have fixed vents or openings to the outdoors or to unconditioned space, or (b)
is a space through which air from directly conditioned spaces is transferred at a rate exceeding three air changes per
CONDITIONED VOLUME is the total volume (in cubic feet) of the conditioned space within a building.
CONTINUOUS INSULATION (c.i.) is insulation that is continuous across all assemblies that separate conditioned
from unconditioned space. It is installed on the exterior or interior or is integral to any opaque surface of the building
envelope and has no thermal bridges other than fasteners and necessary service openings.
SECTION 100.1 – DEFINITIONS AND RULES OF CONSTRUCTION
Page 62 2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards
CONTROLLED ATMOSPHERE is an airtight space maintained at reduced oxygen levels for the purpose of
reducing respiration of perishable product in long term storage.
COOLER is a space to be capable of operation at a temperature greater than or equal to 28°F but less than 55°F.
COOL ROOF is a roofing material with high thermal emittance and high solar reflectance, or low thermal emittance
and exceptionally high solar reflectance as specified in Part 6 that reduces heat gain through the roof.
COOLING EQUIPMENT is equipment used to provide mechanical cooling for a room or rooms in a building.
CRAWL SPACE is a space immediately under the first floor of a building adjacent to grade.
CRRC-1 is the Cool Roof Rating Council document titled “Product Rating Program Manual.”
CTI is the Cooling Technology Institute.
CTI ATC-105 is the Cooling Technology Institute document titled “Acceptance Test Code for Water Cooling
CTI ATC-105S(11) is the Cooling Technology Institute document titled “Acceptance Test Code for Closed-Circuit
CTI ATC-106 is the Cooling Technology Institute document titled “Acceptance Test Code for Mechanical Draft
CTI STD-201 is the Cooling Technology Institute document titled “Standard for Thermal Performance Certification
CURRENT AIR DEMAND is the actual cubic feet per minute (acfm) of total airflow necessary for end uses in a
C-VALUE (also known as C-factor) is the time rate of heat flow through unit area of a body induced by a unit
temperature difference between the body surfaces, in Btu (hr × ft² × °F). It is not the same as K-value or K-factor.
CYCLES OF CONCENTRATION is the number of times the concentration of total dissolved solids (TDS) in
cooling tower water is multiplied relative to the TDS in the makeup water. Because evaporation of pure water leaves
dissolved solids behind in the system water, TDS increases over time as the tower operates. The number of times the
dissolved minerals are concentrated is relative to the TDS in the makeup water. For example, five cycles of
concentration represents five times the concentration of solids in the cooling tower system water relative to the TDS
in the makeup water entering the tower.
DATA CENTER is a building whose primary function is to house computer room(s).
DAYLIT ZONE is the floor area under skylights or next to windows. Types of Daylit Zones include Primary Sidelit
Daylit Zone, Secondary Sidelit Daylit Zone, and Skylit Daylit Zone.
DEADBAND is the temperature range within which the HVAC system is neither calling for heating or cooling.
DECORATIVE GAS APPLIANCE is a gas appliance that is designed or installed for visual effect only, cannot
burn solid wood, and simulates a fire in a fireplace.
DEGREE DAY, HEATING, is a unit, based upon temperature difference and time, used in estimating fuel
consumption and specifying nominal annual heating load of a building. For any one day, when the mean temperature
is less than 65°F, there exist as many degree days as there are Fahrenheit degrees difference in temperature between
the mean temperature for the day and 65°F. The number of degree days for specific geographical locations are those
listed in the Reference Joint Appendix JA2. For those localities not listed in the Reference Joint Appendix JA2, the
number of degree days is as determined by the applicable enforcing agency.
DEMAND FLEXIBILITY MEASURE is a measure that reduces TDV energy consumption using communication
and control technology to shift electricity use across hours of the day to decrease energy use onpeak or increase
energy use offpeak, including but not limited to battery storage, or HVAC or water heating load shifting.
DEMAND RESPONSE is short-term changes in electricity usage by end-use customers from their normal
consumption patterns. Demand response may be in response to:
b. participation in programs or services designed to modify electricity use:
SECTION 100.1 – DEFINITIONS AND RULES OF CONSTRUCTION
2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards Page 63
DEMAND RESPONSE PERIOD is a period of time during which electricity loads are modified in response to a
DEMAND RESPONSE SIGNAL is a signal that indicates a price or a request to modify electricity consumption
DEMAND RESPONSIVE CONTROL is an automatic control that is capable of receiving and automatically
DEMISING PARTITION is a wall, fenestration, floor, or ceiling that separates conditioned space from enclosed
DESIGN CONDITIONS are the parameters and conditions used to determine the performance requirements of
space-conditioning systems. Design conditions for determining design heating and cooling loads are specified in
Section 140.4(b) for nonresidential, high-rise residential, and hotel/motel buildings and in Section 150.0(h) for low-
DESIGN HEAT GAIN RATE is the total calculated heat gain through the building envelope under design
DESIGN HEAT LOSS RATE is the total calculated heat loss through the building envelope under design
DESIGN REVIEW is an additional review of the construction documents (drawings and specifications) that seeks
to improve compliance with existing Title 24 regulations, to encourage adoption of best practices in design, and to
encourage designs that are constructible and maintainable. It is an opportunity for an experienced design engineer or
architect to look at a project with a fresh perspective in an effort to catch missing or unclear design information and
DEW POINT TEMPERATURE is the vapor saturation temperature at a specified pressure for a substance
undergoing phase change from vapor to liquid.
DIRECT DIGITAL CONTROL (DDC) is a type of control where controlled and monitored analog or binary data,
such as temperature and contact closures, are converted to digital format for manipulation and calculations by a
digital computer or microprocessor, then converted back to analog or binary form to control mechanical devices.
DIRECT-VENT APPLIANCE or “sealed combustion” appliance is an appliance that is constructed and installed so
that air from combustion is derived directly from the outdoors and flue gases are discharged to the outdoors.
DISPLAY PERIMETER is the length of an exterior wall in a Group B; Group F, Division 1; or Group M,
Occupancy that immediately abuts a public sidewalk, measured at the sidewalk level for each story that abuts a
DOMESTIC WATER HEATING SYSTEMS (see “service water heating”)
DOOR is an operable opening in the building envelope, including swinging and roll-up doors, fire doors, pet doors
and access hatches with less than 25 percent glazed area. When that operable opening has 25 percent or more glazed
area it is a glazed door. See Fenestration: Glazed Door.
DOOR AREA is the total rough opening area which includes the door, and when present, the fenestration, and the
fenestration frame components in the door frame assembly.
DUAL-GLAZED GREENHOUSE WINDOWS are a type of dual-glazed fenestration product which adds
conditioned volume but not conditioned floor area to a building.
DUCT SEALING is a procedure for installing a space-conditioning distribution system that minimizes leakage of
air from or to the distribution system. Minimum specifications for installation procedures, materials, diagnostic
testing and field verification are contained in the Reference Residential Appendix RA3 and Reference Nonresidential
DUCT SYSTEM is all the ducts, duct fittings, plenums and fans when assembled to form a continuous passageway
SECTION 100.1 – DEFINITIONS AND RULES OF CONSTRUCTION
Page 64 2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards
DUCTED SYSTEM is an air conditioner or heat pump, either a split system or single-packaged unit, that is
designed to be permanently installed equipment and delivers conditioned air to an indoor space through a duct.
DWELLING is a building that contains one or two dwelling units used, intended or designed to be used, rented,
leased, let or hired out to be occupied for living purposes.
DWELLING UNIT is a single unit providing complete, independent living facilities for one or more persons
including access, permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation.
ECONOMIZER, AIR, is a ducting arrangement, including dampers, linkages, and an automatic control system that
allows a cooling supply fan system to supply outside air to reduce or eliminate the need for mechanical cooling.
ECONOMIZER, WATER, is a system by which the supply air of a cooling system is cooled directly or indirectly
by evaporation of water, or other appropriate fluid, in order to reduce or eliminate the need for mechanical cooling.
ELECTRICAL POWER DISTRIBUTION SYSTEMS. The following definitions are intended to apply to Section
EQUIPMENT. A general term, including devices, luminaires, apparatus, machinery, and the like used as a part
PLUG LOAD is the energy consumed by any appliances or electronic device that is plugged into a receptacle or
receptacle outlet. Plug loads are not related to general lighting, heating, ventilation, cooling, and water heating,
domestic and service water system, renewable power, information technology equipment, computer room
electronic equipment, and electric vehicle charging.
ELECTRICAL METERING is a device or system for measuring the electrical power and energy supplied to a
LOW VOLTAGE DRY-TYPE DISTRIBUTION TRANSFORMER is a distribution transformer that has an
input voltage of 600 volts or less, that is air-cooled, and that does not use oil as a coolant.
SERVICE is the conductors and equipment for delivering electric energy from the serving utility to the wiring
SERVICE EQUIPMENT is the necessary equipment, usually consisting of a circuit breaker(s) or switch(es)
and fuse(s) and their accessories, connected to the load end of service conductors to a building or other structure,
or an otherwise designated area, and intended to constitute the main control and cutoff of the supply.
ELECTRONICALLY-COMMUTATED MOTOR is a brushless DC motor with a permanent magnet rotor that is
surrounded by stationary motor windings, and an electronic controller that varies rotor speed and direction by
sequentially supplying DC current to the windings.
EMITTANCE, THERMAL is the ratio of the radiant heat flux emitted by a sample to that emitted by a blackbody
ENCLOSED SPACE is space that is substantially surrounded by solid surfaces, including walls, ceilings or roofs,
ENERGY BUDGET is the maximum energy consumption, based on Time Dependent Valuation (TDV) energy, that
a proposed building, or portion of a building, can be designed to consume, calculated using Commission-approved
compliance software as specified by the Alternative Calculation Method Approval Manual. The Energy Budget for
newly constructed, low-rise residential buildings is expressed in terms of the Energy Design Rating.
ENERGY COMMISSION (CEC) is the California State Energy Resources Conservation and Development
ENERGY DESIGN RATING (EDR) is a way to express the energy consumption of a building as a rating score
index where a score of 100 represents the energy consumption of the building built to the specifications of the
Residential Energy Services (RESNET) reference home characterization of the 2006 International Energy
Conservation Code (IECC) with Title 24, Part 6 modeling assumptions, and a score of 0 (zero) represents a building
that has zero net energy consumption. The EDR is calculated using Commission-approved compliance software as
specified by the Alternative Calculation Method Approval Manual.
SECTION 100.1 – DEFINITIONS AND RULES OF CONSTRUCTION
2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards Page 65
ENERGY DESIGN RATING, ENERGY EFFICIENCY is an Energy Design Rating based on the TDV energy
consumption of a building that results from the building’s energy efficiency characteristics, calculated using
Commission-approved compliance software as specified by the Alternative Calculation Methods Approval Manual.
ENERGY DESIGN RATING, SOLAR ELECTRIC GENERATION AND DEMAND FLEXIBILITY is the
reduction in TDV energy consumption of a building expressed in terms of an Energy Design Rating reduction that
results from the combination of the building’s solar electric generation system and demand flexibility measures.
ENERGY DESIGN RATING, TOTAL is the total Energy Design Rating for the building that is determined by
subtracting the Solar Electric Generation System and Demand Flexibility Energy Design Rating from the Energy
ENERGY EFFICIENCY RATIO (EER) is the ratio of net cooling capacity (in Btu/hr) to total rate of electrical
energy input (in watts), of a cooling system under designated operating conditions, as determined using the
applicable test method in the Appliance Efficiency Regulations or Section 110.2.
ENERGY FACTOR (EF) of a water heater is a measure of overall water heater efficiency, as determined using the
applicable test method in the Appliance Efficiency Regulations.
ENERGY MANAGEMENT CONTROL SYSTEM (EMCS) is an automated control system that regulates the
energy consumption of a building by controlling the operation of energy consuming systems, and is capable of
monitoring loads and adjusting operations in order to optimize energy usage and respond to demand response
ENERGY OBTAINED FROM DEPLETABLE SOURCES is electricity purchased from a public utility, or any
energy obtained from coal, oil, natural gas, or liquefied petroleum gases.
ENERGY OBTAINED FROM NONDEPLETABLE SOURCES is energy that is not energy obtained from
ENFORCEMENT AGENCY is the city, county, or state agency responsible for issuing a building permit.
ENTIRE BUILDING is the ensemble of all enclosed space in a building, including the space for which a permit is
sought, plus all existing conditioned and unconditioned space within the structure.
EXFILTRATION is uncontrolled outward air leakage from inside a building, including leakage through cracks and
interstices, around windows and doors, and through any other exterior partition or duct penetration.
EXTERIOR FLOOR/SOFFIT is a horizontal exterior partition, or a horizontal demising partition, under
conditioned space. For low-rise residential occupancies, exterior floors also include those on grade.
EXTERIOR PARTITION is an opaque, translucent, or transparent solid barrier that separates conditioned space
from ambient air or space. For low-rise residential occupancies, exterior partitions also include barriers that separate
conditioned space from unconditioned space, or the ground.
EXTERIOR ROOF/CEILING is an exterior partition, or a demising partition, that has a slope less than 60° from
horizontal, that has conditioned space below, and that is not an exterior door or skylight.
EXTERIOR ROOF/CEILING AREA is the area of the exterior surface of exterior roof/ceilings.
EXTERIOR WALL is any wall or element of a wall, or any member or group of members, which defines the
exterior boundaries or courts of a building and which has a slope of 60° or greater with the horizontal plane. An
exterior wall or partition is not an exterior floor/soffit, exterior door, exterior roof/ceiling, window, skylight, or
EXTERIOR WALL AREA is the area of the opaque exterior surface of exterior walls.
FAÇADE is the contiguous exterior of a building surface, but not limited to fenestration products.
FACTORY is build, structure or space designated as Factory Group F that is used for assembling, disassembling,
FACTORY ASSEMBLED COOLING TOWERS are cooling towers constructed from factory-assembled modules
either shipped to the site in one piece or put together in the field.
SECTION 100.1 – DEFINITIONS AND RULES OF CONSTRUCTION
Page 66 2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards
ACE is an NFRC-Approved Calculation Entity that conducts calculations of fenestration product ratings for
certification authorization using the NFRC Component Modeling approach and issues label certificates to Specifying
Authorities for product certification authorization in accordance with NFRC requirements.
ALTERED COMPONENT is a new fenestration component that has undergone an alteration other than a
repair and is subject to all applicable Standards requirements.
BAY WINDOW is a combination assembly which is composed of three or more individual windows either
joined side by side or installed within opaque assemblies and which projects away from the wall on which it is
installed. Center windows, if used are parallel to the wall on which the bay is installed, the end panels or two
side windows are angled with respect to the center window. Common angles are 30° and 45°, although other
CLERESTORY is fenestration installed above a roofline greater than or equal to 60° from the horizontal, or
any portion of exterior vertical glazing greater than eight feet per floor above the finished floor of a space.
CMA (component modeling approach) is a fenestration product certification program from the National
Fenestration Rating Council (NFRC) that enables energy-related performance ratings for nonresidential
fenestration products, including the thermal performance U-factor, Solar Heat Gain Coefficient, and Visible
CMAST (Component Modeling Approach Software Tool) is an NFRC approved software that allows a user to
create a fenestration product “virtually,” and generate its energy-related performance ratings, including the
thermal performance U-factor, Solar Heat Gain Coefficient, and Visible Transmittance.
CURTAIN WALL/STOREFRONT is an external non-bearing wall intended to separate the exterior
nonconditioned and interior conditioned spaces. It also consists of any combination of framing materials, fixed
glazing, opaque glazing, operable windows, or other in-fill materials.
DUAL-GLAZED GREENHOUSE WINDOWS is a double glass pane separated by an air or other gas space
that adds conditioned volume but not conditioned floor area to a building.
DYNAMIC GLAZING SYSTEMS are glazing systems that have the ability to reversibly change their
performance properties, including U-factor, Solar Heat Gain Coefficient (SHGC), and/or Visible Transmittance
(VT) between well-defined end points. These may include, but are not limited to chromogenic glazing systems
and integrated shading systems (defined below). Dynamic Glazing systems do not include internally mounted or
externally mounted shading devices that attach to the window framing/glazing that may or may not be
CHROMOGENIC GLAZING is a class of switchable glazing that includes active materials (e.g.
electrochromic) and passive materials (e.g. photochromic and thermochromic) permanently integrated into
the glazing assembly. Their primary function is to switch reversibly from a high transmission state to a low
transmission state with associated changes in VT and SHGC.
INTEGRATED SHADING SYSTEM is a class of fenestration products including an active layer: e.g.
shades, louvers, blinds or other materials permanently integrated between two or more glazing layers. The
U-factor and/or SHGC and VT of the insulating glass assembly can be altered by reversibly changing the
FENESTRATION ALTERATION is any change to an existing building's exterior fenestration product that is
i.Replaces existing fenestration in an existing wall or roof with no net area added; or
ii.Replaces existing fenestration and adds new net area in the existing wall or roof; or
iii.Adds a new window that increases the net fenestration area to an existing wall or roof.
FENESTRATION AREA is the rough opening area of any fenestration product.
FENESTRATION PRODUCT is any transparent or translucent material plus any sash, frame, mullions and
dividers, in the facade of a building, including, but not limited to, windows, glazed doors, skylights, curtain
walls, dynamic glazing, garden windows and glass block.
SECTION 100.1 – DEFINITIONS AND RULES OF CONSTRUCTION
2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards Page 67
FENESTRATION REPAIR is the reconstruction or renewal for the purpose of maintenance of any
fenestration product, component or system and shall not increase the preexisting energy consumption of the
repaired fenestration product, component, system, or equipment. Replacement of any component, system, or
equipment for which there are requirements in the Standards are considered an alteration (see “fenestration”,
“alteration”) and not a repair and is subject to the requirements of Part 6 of the Standards.
FIELD-FABRICATED is a fenestration product whose frame is made at the construction site of standard
dimensional lumber or other materials that were not previously cut, or otherwise formed with the specific
intention of being used to fabricate a fenestration product. Field fabricated does not include site-built
FIN is an opaque surface, oriented vertically and projecting outward horizontally from an exterior vertical
FIN OFFSET is the horizontal distance from the edge of exposed exterior glazing at the jamb of a window to
FIN PROJECTION is the horizontal distance, measured outward horizontally, from the surface of exposed
exterior glazing at the jamb of a window to the outward edge of a fin.
FIXED is fenestration that is not designed to be opened or closed.
GLAZED DOOR is an exterior door having a glazed area of 25 percent or greater of the area of the door.
Glazed doors shall meet fenestration product requirements. See “door”.
GREENHOUSE or GARDEN WINDOW is a window unit that consists of a three-dimensional, five-sided
structure generally protruding from the wall in which it is installed. Operating sash may or may not be included.
HORIZONTAL SLATS, when referring to a daylighting device, is a set of adjacent surfaces located directly
adjacent to vertical fenestration, oriented horizontally and projecting horizontally from its interior or exterior
LIGHT SHELF is an adjacent, opaque surfaced daylighting device located at the sill of clerestory glazing,
oriented horizontally and projecting horizontally from an interior or exterior vertical surface.
MANUFACTURED or KNOCKED DOWN PRODUCT is a fenestration product constructed of materials
which are factory cut or otherwise factory formed with the specific intention of being used to fabricate a
fenestration product. Knocked down or partially assembled products may be sold as a fenestration product when
provided with temporary and permanent labels as described in Section 10-111; or as a site-built fenestration
product when not provided with temporary and permanent labels as described in Section 10-111.
NFRC 100 is the National Fenestration Rating Council document titled “NFRC 100: Procedure for Determining
NFRC 200 is the National Fenestration Rating Council document titled “NFRC 200: Procedure for Determining
Fenestration Product Solar Heat Gain Coefficients and Visible Transmittance at Normal Incidence.” (2017).
NFRC 202 is the National Fenestration Rating Council document titled “NFRC 202: Procedures for
Determining Translucent Fenestration Product Visible Transmittance at Normal Incidence.” (2017).
NFRC 203 is the National Fenestration Rating Council document titled “NFRC 203: Procedure for Determining
Visible Transmittance of Tubular Daylighting Devices.” (2017).
NFRC 400 is the National Fenestration Rating Council document titled “NFRC 400: Procedure for Determining
OPERABLE SHADING DEVICE is a device at the interior or exterior of a building or integral with a
fenestration product, which is capable of being operated, either manually or automatically, to adjust the amount
of solar radiation admitted to the interior of the building.
RELATIVE SOLAR HEAT GAIN COEFFICIENT (RSHGC) is the ratio of solar heat gain through a
fenestration product (corrected for external shading) to the incident solar radiation. Solar heat gain includes
directly transmitted solar heat and absorbed solar radiation, which is then reradiated, conducted, or convected
SECTION 100.1 – DEFINITIONS AND RULES OF CONSTRUCTION
Page 68 2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards
SITE-BUILT is fenestration designed to be field-glazed or field assembled units using specific factory cut or
otherwise factory formed framing and glazing units, that are manufactured with the intention of being assembled
at the construction site. These include storefront systems, curtain walls, and atrium roof systems.
SKYLIGHT ROOF RATIO (SRR) is the ratio of the skylight area to the gross exterior roof area.
SOLAR HEAT GAIN COEFFICIENT (SHGC) is the ratio of the solar heat gain entering the space through
the fenestration area to the incident solar radiation. Solar heat gain includes directly transmitted solar heat and
absorbed solar radiation, which is then reradiated, conducted, or convected into the space.
SPANDRAL is opaque glazing material most often used to conceal building elements between floors of a
building so they cannot be seen from the exterior, also known as “opaque in-fill systems”.
TINTED GLASS is colored glass by incorporation of a mineral admixture resulting in a degree of tinting. Any
tinting reduces both visible and radiant transmittance.
VERTICAL FENESTRATION is all fenestration other than skylights and doors.
VISIBLE REFLECTANCE is the reflectance of light at wavelengths from 410 to 722 namometers.
VISIBLE TRANSMITTANCE (VT) is the ratio (expressed as a decimal) of visible light that is transmitted
through a glazing fenestration. The higher the VT rating, the more light is allowed through a window.
WINDOW is fenestration that is not a skylight and that is an assembled unit consisting of a frame and sash
component holding one or more pieces of glazing.
WINDOW AREA is the area of the surface of a window, plus the area of the frame, sash, and mullions.
WINDOW HEAD HEIGHT is the height from the floor to the top of the vertical fenestration.
WINDOW WALL RATIO (WWR) is the ratio of the window area to the gross exterior wall area.
FIELD ERECTED COOLING TOWERS are cooling towers which are custom designed for a specific application
and which cannot be delivered to a project site in the form of factory assembled modules due to their size,
FIREPLACE is a hearth and fire chamber, or similar prepared place, in which a fire may be made and which is built
in conjunction with a flue or chimney, including but not limited to factory-built fireplaces, masonry fireplaces, and
masonry heaters as further clarified in the CBC.
FLOOR/SOFFIT TYPE is a type of floor/soffit assembly having a specific heat capacity, framing type, and U-
FLUID COOLER is a fan-powered heat rejection device that includes a water or glycol circuit connected by a
closed circulation loop to a liquid-cooled refrigerant condenser, and may be either evaporative-cooled, air-cooled, or
FLUX is the rate of energy flow per unit area.
FOOD PREPARATION EQUIPMENT is cooking equipment intended for commercial use, including coffee
machines, espresso coffee makers, conductive cookers, food warmers including heated food servers, fryers, griddles,
nut warmers, ovens, popcorn makers, steam kettles, ranges, and cooking appliances for use in commercial kitchens,
restaurants, or other business establishments where food is dispensed.
FREEZER is a space designed to be capable of operation at less than 28°F.
GAS COOLER is a refrigeration component that reduces the temperature of a refrigerant vapor by rejecting heat to
air mechanically circulated over its heat transfer surface. Used by a CO2 refrigeration system in transcitical mode,
and normally also capable of operating in subcritical mode.
GAS COOLING EQUIPMENT is cooling equipment that produces chilled water or cold air using natural gas or
liquefied petroleum gas as the primary energy source.
GAS HEATING SYSTEM is a system that uses natural gas or liquefied petroleum gas as a fuel to heat a
GAS LOG is a self-contained, free-standing, open-flame, gas-burning appliance consisting of a metal frame or base
supporting simulated logs, and designed for installation only in a vented fireplace.
SECTION 100.1 – DEFINITIONS AND RULES OF CONSTRUCTION
2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards Page 69
GLOBAL WARMING POTENTIAL (GWP) is the radiative forcing impact of one mass-based unit of a given
greenhouse gas relative to an equivalent unit of carbon dioxide over a given period of time.
GLOBAL WARMING POTENTIAL VALUE (GWP Value) is the 100-year GWP value published by the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) in either its Second Assessment Report (SAR) (IPCC, 1995), or
its Fourth Assessment A-3 Report (AR4) (IPCC, 2007). Both the 1995 IPCC SAR values and the 2007 IPCC AR4
values are published in table 2.14 of the 2007 IPCC AR4. The SAR GWP values are found in column “SAR (100-
GOVERNMENTAL AGENCY is any public agency or subdivision thereof, including, but not limited to, any
agency of the state, a county, a city, a district, an association of governments, or a joint power agency.
GROSS EXTERIOR ROOF AREA is the sum of the skylight area and the exterior roof/ceiling area.
GROSS EXTERIOR WALL AREA is the sum of the window area, door area, and exterior wall area.
HABITABLE SPACE is space in a building for living, sleeping, eating or cooking, excluding bathrooms, toilets,
hallways, storage areas, closets, utility rooms and similar areas. (See also “occupiable space”.)
HABITABLE STORY is a story that contains habitable space and that has at least 50 percent of its volume above
HEALTHCARE FACILITY is any building or portion thereof licensed pursuant to California Health and Safety
HEAT CAPACITY (HC) is the measurable physical quantity that characterizes the amount of heat required to
change a substance's temperature by a given amount.
HEAT PUMP is an appliance, that consists of one or more assemblies; that uses an indoor conditioning coil, a
compressor, and a refrigerant-to-outdoor air heat exchanger to provide air heating; and that may also provide air
HEATED SLAB FLOOR is a concrete floor either, on-grade, raised, or a lightweight concrete slab topping.
Heating is provided by a system placed within or under the slab, and is sometimes referred to as a radiant slab floor.
HEATING EQUIPMENT is equipment used to provide mechanical heating for a room or rooms in a building.
HEATING SEASONAL PERFORMANCE FACTOR (HSPF) is the total heating output of a central air-
conditioning heat pump (in Btu) during its normal use period for heating divided by the total electrical energy input
(in watt-hours) during the same period, as determined using the applicable test method in the Appliance Efficiency
HIGH-RISE RESIDENTIAL BUILDING is a building, other than a hotel/motel, of Occupancy Group R-2 or R-4
with four or more habitable stories.
HOTEL/MOTEL is a building or buildings that has six or more guest rooms or a lobby serving six or more guest
rooms, where the guest rooms are intended or designed to be used, or which are used, rented, or hired out to be
occupied, or which are occupied for sleeping purposes by guests, and all conditioned spaces within the same building
envelope. Hotel/motel also includes all conditioned spaces which are (1) on the same property as the hotel/motel, (2)
served by the same central heating, ventilation, and air-conditioning system as the hotel/motel, and (3) integrally
related to the functioning of the hotel/motel as such, including, but not limited to, exhibition facilities, meeting and
conference facilities, food service facilities, lobbies, and laundries.
HVAC SYSTEM is a space-conditioning system or a ventilation system.
HVI 915 is the Home Ventilating Institute document titled “Home Ventilating Institute Loudness Testing and Rating
HVI 916 is the Home Ventilating Institute document titled “Home Ventilating Institute Airflow Test Procedure,”
HVI 920 is the Home Ventilating Institute document titled “Home Ventilating Institute Product Performance
Certification Procedure Including Verification And Challenge,” 2015 (HVI Publication 920-2015).
SECTION 100.1 – DEFINITIONS AND RULES OF CONSTRUCTION
Page 70 2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards
IES LIGHTING HANDBOOK is the Illuminating Engineering Society document titled “The IES Lighting
IES LM-79-08 is the Illuminating Engineering Society document titled, “IES Approved Method for the Electrical
and Photometric Measurements of Solid-State Lighting Products” (2008).
IES TM-15-11 is the Illuminating Engineering Society document titled, “Luminaire Classification Systems for
INFILTRATION is uncontrolled inward air leakage from outside a building or unconditioned space, including
leakage through cracks and interstices, around windows and doors, and through any other exterior or demising
partition or pipe or duct penetration. See AIR BARRIER.
INTEGRATED ENERGY EFFICIENCY RATIO (IEER) is a single-number cooling part load efficiency figure
of merit calculated as specified by the method described in ANSI/AHRI Standard 340/360/1230 . This metric
replaces the IPLV for ducted and non-ducted units.
INTEGRATED PART LOAD VALUE (IPLV) is a single-number cooling part-load efficiency figure of merit
calculated as specified by the method described in ANSI/AHRI Standard 550/590 for use with chillers.
ISO STANDARD 17025 is the International Organization for Standardization document titled "General Criteria for
the Competence of Testing and Calibration Laboratories", 2005 (ANSI/ISO/IEC Standard 17025:2005).
ISO 13256-1 is the International Organization for Standardization document titled "Water-source heat pumps --
Testing and rating for performance -- Part 1: Water-to-air and brine-to-air heat pumps," 1998.
ISO 13256-2 is the International Organization for Standardization document titled "Water-source heat pumps --
Testing and rating for performance -- Part 1: Water-to-water and brine-to-water heat pumps," 1998.
LANGELIER SATURATION INDEX (LSI) is expressed as the difference between the actual system pH and the
saturation pH. LSI indicates whether water will precipitate, dissolve, or be in equilibrium with calcium carbonate,
LARGEST NET CAPACITY INCREMENT is the largest increase in capacity when switching between
combinations of base compressors that is expected to occur under the compressed air system control scheme.
Accent Lighting is directional lighting designed to highlight or spotlight objects. It can be recessed, surface
Chandelier is a ceiling-mounted, close-to-ceiling, or suspended decorative luminaire that uses glass, crystal,
Color Rendering Index (CRI) is the ability of a light source to reflect the color of illuminated objects with
fidelity relative to ideal or natural light sources of the same color temperature. CRI is calculated according to
Correlated Color Temperature (CCT) is a description of color of light relative to the chromaticity of the
radiative emission of heated black body and reported in temperature units of Kelvin according to CIE 15
Colored light source is a light source designed and marketed as a colored light source and not designed or
marketed for general lighting applications with either of the following characteristics maintained throughout all
modes of operation including color changing operation:
(1)A Color Rendering Index (CRI) less than 40, as determined according to the method set forth in CIE
(2)A Correlated Color Temperature less than 2,200 K or greater than 7,000 K as determined according to
the method set forth in IES LM-66 or IES LM-79, as appropriate.
Compact Fluorescent Lamp is a single-ended fluorescent lamp with a T5 or smaller diameter glass tube that is
Decorative (Lighting/Luminaire) is lighting or luminaires installed only for aesthetic purposes and that does
not serve as display lighting or general lighting.
SECTION 100.1 – DEFINITIONS AND RULES OF CONSTRUCTION
2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards Page 71
Display Lighting is lighting that provides a higher level of illuminance to a specific area than the level of
surrounding ambient illuminance. Types of display lighting include:
Floor: supplementary lighting required to highlight features, such as merchandise on a clothing rack, which is
Wall: supplementary lighting required to highlight features, such as merchandise on a shelf, which is displayed
Window: lighting of objects such as merchandise, goods, and artifacts, in a show window, to be viewed from
the outside of a space through a window.
Case: lighting of small art objects, artifacts, or valuable collections which involves customer inspection of very
fine detail from outside of a glass enclosed display case.
Enclosed Luminaires are luminaires which contain enclosed lamp compartments where ventilation openings
are less than 3 square inches per lamp in the lamp compartment as defined by UL 1598.
General Lighting is installed electric lighting that provides a uniform level of illumination throughout an area,
exclusive of any provision for special visual tasks or decorative effect, exclusive of daylighting, and also known
GU-24 is the designation of a lamp holder and socket configuration, based on a coding system by the
International Energy Consortium, where “G” indicates the broad type of two or more projecting contacts, such
as pins or posts, “U” distinguishes between lamp and holder designs of similar type but that are not
interchangeable due to electrical or mechanical requirements, and “24” indicates 24 millimeters center to center
spacing of the electrical contact posts.
Illuminance is the area density of the luminous flux incident at a point on a surface.
Illumination is light incident on a surface of body, or the general condition of being illuminated.
Inseparable Solid State Lighting (SSL) Luminaire is a luminaire featuring solid state lighting components
such as LEDs and driver components which cannot be easily removed or replaced by the end user, thus requiring
replacement of the entire luminaire. Removal of solid state lighting components may require the cutting of
wires, use of a soldering iron, or damage to or destruction of the luminaire.
Institutional Tuning is the process of adjusting the maximum light output of lighting systems to support visual
needs or save energy. Institutional tuning differs from personal tuning in that the control strategy is implemented
at the institutional rather than the individual user level, and maximum light level adjustments are available only
Lamp is an electrical appliance that produces optical radiation for the purpose of visual illumination, designed
with a base to provide an electrical connection between the lamp and a luminaire, and designed to be installed
into a luminaire. A lamp is not a luminaire and is not an LED retrofit kit.
Landscape Lighting is a type of outdoor lighting that is recessed into or mounted on the ground, paving, or
raised deck, which is mounted less than 42 inches above grade or mounted onto trees or trellises, and that is
intended to be aimed only at landscape features.
Lantern is an outdoor luminaire that uses an electric lamp to replicate the appearance of a pre-electric lantern,
which used a flame to generate light.
Light is the luminous equivalent of power and is properly called luminous flux.
Lighting, or illumination, is the application of light to achieve some practical or aesthetic effect.
Light Emitting Diode (LED) is a p-n junction solid state diode whose radiated output is a function of its
physical construction, material used and exciting current. The output may be in the near ultraviolet, the visible or
in the infrared regions of the spectrum.
LED Light Engine is an integrated assembly comprised of LED packages, LED components, LED arrays, LED
modules, or LED driver, and other optical, thermal, mechanical and electrical components. The device is
intended to connect directly to the branch circuit through a custom connector compatible with the LED
luminaire for which it was designed and does not use an ANSI standard base. (IES RP-16-17).
SECTION 100.1 – DEFINITIONS AND RULES OF CONSTRUCTION
Page 72 2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards
LED Retrofit Kit is a solid state lighting product intended to replace existing light sources and systems,
including incandescent and fluorescent light sources, in previously installed luminaires that already comply with
safety standards. These kits replace the existing light source and related electrical components, and are classified
or certified to UL 1598C. They may employ an ANSI standard lamp base, either integral or connected to the
retrofit by wire leads. LED retrofit kit does not include self-ballasted lamps.
Non-integrated LED lamp is an assembly composed of a light emitting diode (LED) array (module) or LED
packages (components), and an ANSI standard base. The device is intended to connect to the LED driver of an
LED luminaire through an ANSI standard lamp-holder (socket). The device cannot be connected directly to the
Integrated LED lamp is an integrated assembly composed of light emitting diode (LED) packages
(components) or LED arrays (modules), as well as an LED driver, an ANSI standard base, and other optical,
thermal, mechanical and electrical components. The device is intended to connect directly to the branch circuit
through a corresponding ANSI standard lamp-holder (socket). (ANSI/IES RP-16-17).
Low Voltage is less than 90 volts.
Lumen Maintenance is a strategy used to provide a precise, constant level of lighting from a lighting system
regardless of the age of the lamps or the maintenance of the luminaires.
Luminaire is a complete lighting unit consisting of a light source such as a lamp or lamps, together with the
parts that distribute the light, position and protect the light source and connect it to the power supply.
Luminance is the luminous intensity of the source or surface divided by the area of the source or surface seen
Luminous Efficacy is a measure of the luminous efficiency of a light source. It is the quotient of the total
luminous flux emitted by the total light source power input, expressed in lm/W.
Luminous Flux is visually evaluated radiant flux and defines “light” for purposes of lighting design and
Marquee Lighting is a permanent lighting system consisting of one or more rows of many small lamps,
including light emitting diodes (LEDs) lamps, tungsten lamps, low pressure discharge lamps or fiber optic
Narrow Band Spectrum is a limited range of wavelengths (nm) concentric to a dominant peak wavelength in
the visible spectrum. The limited range of wavelength shall be within 20 nm on either side of the peak
wavelength at 50 percent of the peak wavelength’s relative spectral power, and within 75 nm on either side of
the peak wavelength at 10 percent of the peak wavelength’s relative spectral power.
Ornamental Lighting for compliance with Part 6 is the following:
Luminaires installed outdoor which are rated for 30 watts or less that are post-top luminaires, lanterns, pendant
luminaires, chandeliers, and marquee lighting, not providing general lighting or task lighting.
Decorative Luminaires installed indoor that are chandeliers, sconces, lanterns, neon and cold cathode, light
emitting diodes, theatrical projectors, moving lights, and light color panels, not providing general lighting or
Pendant (Suspended) is a luminaire that is hung from a ceiling by supports.
Permanently Installed lighting consists of luminaires that are affixed to land, within the meaning of Civil Code
Sections 658 and 660, except as provided below. Permanently installed luminaires may be mounted inside or
outside of a building or site. Permanently installed luminaires may have either plug-in or hardwired connections
for electric power. Examples include track and flexible lighting systems; lighting attached to walls, ceilings,
columns, inside or outside of permanently installed cabinets, internally illuminated cabinets, mounted on poles,
in trees, or in the ground; attached to ceiling fans and integral to exhaust fans. Permanently installed lighting
does not include portable lighting or lighting that is installed by the manufacturer in exhaust hoods for cooking
equipment, refrigerated cases, food preparation equipment, and scientific and industrial equipment.
Portable Lighting is lighting, with plug-in connections for electric power, that is: table and freestanding floor
lamps; attached to modular furniture; workstation task luminaires; luminaires attached to workstation panels;
attached to movable displays; or attached to other personal property.
SECTION 100.1 – DEFINITIONS AND RULES OF CONSTRUCTION
2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards Page 73
Post Top Luminaire is an outdoor luminaire that is mounted directly on top of a lamp-post.
Precision Lighting is task lighting for commercial or industrial work that illuminates low contrast, finely
Radiant Power is the time-rate-flow of radiant energy.
Radiant Energy is energy travelling in the form of electromagnetic waves. It is measured in units of energy
Recessed Luminaire is a luminaire that is mounted in the ceiling or behind a wall or other surface with the
opening of the luminaire flush with the surface.
Sconce is a wall mounted decorative accent luminaire.
Solid State Lighting (SSL) is a family of light sources that includes: semiconductor light emitting diodes
(LEDs); and organic light emitting diodes (OLEDs).
Driver, when used in relation to solid state lighting, is a device that uses semiconductors to control and supply
dc power for LED starting and operation.
Source (light) is the general term used to reference a source of light. It can refer variously to an electric lamp, a
light emitting diode (LED), an entire luminaire with lamp and optical control, or fenestration for daylighting.
Special Effects Lighting is lighting installed to give off luminance instead of providing illuminance, which
does not serve as general, task, or display lighting.
Task Lighting is lighting that is not general lighting and that specifically illuminates a location where a task is
Temporary Lighting is a lighting installation, with plug-in connections, that does not persist beyond 60
consecutive days or more than 120 days per year.
Track Lighting is a system that includes luminaires and a track, rails, or cables that both mount the system, and
deliver electric power. Track lighting includes the following types:
Line-Voltage Track Lighting is equipped with luminaires that, use line-voltage lamps or that are equipped
with integral transformers at each luminaire.
Low-Voltage Track Lighting is equipped with remote transformers for use with low-voltage equipment
along the entire length of track.
Track Lighting Integral Current Limiter consists of a current limiter integral to the end-feed housing of a
manufactured line-voltage track lighting system.
Track Lighting Supplementary Overcurrent Protection Panel is a panelboard containing Supplementary
Overcurrent Protection Devices as defined in Article 100 of the California Electrical Code, and used only with
Track Mounted Luminaires are luminaires designed to be attached at any point along a track lighting
system. Track mounted luminaires may be line-voltage or low-voltage.
Tuning is the ability to set maximum light levels at a lower level than full lighting power.
LIGHTING CONTROLS consist of the following:
Astronomical Time-Switch Control is a lighting control that controls lighting based on the time of day and
astronomical events such as sunset and sunrise, accounting for geographic location and calendar date.
Automatic Daylight Control uses one or more photosensors to detect changes in daylight illumination and then
automatically adjusts the luminous flux of the electric lighting system in response.
Automatic Multilevel Daylight Control adjusts the luminous flux of the electric lighting system in either a series of
steps or by continuous dimming in response to available daylight. This kind of control uses one or more
photosensors to detect changes in daylight illumination and then automatically adjusts the electric lighting levels in
SECTION 100.1 – DEFINITIONS AND RULES OF CONSTRUCTION
Page 74 2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards
Automatic Scheduling Control is a time-based lighting control that is capable of being programmed to reduce or
turn off lighting power for a portion of the night and to turn off lighting power for the day.
Automatic Time Switch Control controls lighting based on the time of day.
Captive-Key Override is a type of lighting control in which the key that activates the override cannot be released
when the lights are in the on position.
Countdown Timer Switch turns lighting or other loads ON when activated using one or more selectable countdown
time periods and then automatically turns lighting or other loads OFF when the selected time period had elapsed.
Dimmer is a lighting control that varies the luminous flux of the electric lighting system by changing the power used
Dimmer, Full-Range, or Continuous Dimmer, means a dimmer that varies the luminous flux of the electric lighting
system over a continuous range from the device's maximum light output to the device's minimum light output
without visually apparent abrupt changes in light level between the various steps.
Dimmer, Stepped varies the luminous flux of the electric lighting system in one or more predetermined discrete
steps between maximum light output and OFF with changes in light level between adjacent steps being visually
Dimmer, Forward Phase Cut, varies the luminous flux of the electric lighting system in which a portion of the
alternating current voltage waveform supplying to the light source is removed.
Lighting Control, Self-Contained is a unitary lighting control module that requires no additional components to be
Lighting Control System requires two or more components to be installed in the building to provide all of the
functionality required to make up a fully functional and compliant lighting control.
Multilevel Astronomical Time Switch is an Astronomical Time Switch Control that reduces lighting power in
Multilevel Lighting Control reduces power going to a lighting system in multiple steps.
Multiscene Programmable Control allows for two or more predefined lighting settings, in addition to all-OFF, for
two or more groups of luminaires to suit multiple activities in the space.
NEMA SSL 7A is the National Electrical Manufacturers Association document titled “Phase Cut Dimming for
Solid State Lighting: Basic Compatibility,” 2015 (NEMA SSL 7A-2015).
Occupant Sensing Controls automatically control levels of illumination, allow for manual operation, and consist of
Motion Sensor is used outdoors, automatically reduces lighting power or turns lights OFF after an area is
vacated of occupants, and automatically turns the lights ON when the area is occupied.
Occupant Sensor is used indoors, automatically reduces lighting power or turns lights OFF after an area is
vacated of occupants and is capable of automatically turning the lighting load ON when an area is occupied.
Partial-ON Occupant or Motion Sensor automatically turns lights OFF after an area is vacated of occupants
and is capable of automatically or manually turning ON part of the lighting load when an area is occupied.
Partial-OFF Occupant or Motion Sensor automatically dims the lighting or turns OFF part of the lighting
load after an area is vacated of occupants, and is capable of automatically turning ON the lighting load or
restoring it to full when an area is occupied.
Vacancy Sensor automatically turns lights OFF after an area is vacated of occupants but requires lights to be
Part-Night Outdoor Lighting Control is a light sensing and time-based lighting control device or system that is
programmed to reduce or turn off the lighting power to an outdoor luminaire for a portion of the night.
Photo Control automatically turns lights ON and OFF, or automatically adjusts lighting levels, in response to the
amount of daylight that is available. A Photo Control may also be one component of a field assembled lighting
SECTION 100.1 – DEFINITIONS AND RULES OF CONSTRUCTION
2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards Page 75
system, the component having the capability to provide a signal proportional to the amount of daylight to a Lighting
Control System to dim or brighten the electric lights in response.
Shut-off Controls is any lighting control capable of automatically shutting OFF the lighting in a space when the
LISTED is in accordance with Article 100 of the California Electrical Code.
LOW-GWP REFRIGERANT is a compound used as a heat transfer fluid or gas that is: (A) any compound or
blend of compounds, with a GWP Value less than 150; and (B) U.S. EPA Significant New Alternatives Policy
(SNAP)-approved; and (C) not an ozone depleting substance as defined in Title 40 of the Code of Federal
LOW-RISE RESIDENTIAL BUILDING is a building, other than a hotel/motel, that is Occupancy Group:
R-2, multifamily, with three habitable stories or less; or
MANUAL is capable of being operated by personal intervention.
MANUFACTURED DEVICE is any heating, cooling, ventilation, lighting, water heating, refrigeration, cooking,
plumbing fitting, insulation, door, fenestration product, or any other appliance, device, equipment, or system subject
MECHANICAL COOLING is lowering the temperature within a space using refrigerant compressors or absorbers,
desiccant dehumidifiers, or other systems that require energy to directly condition the space. In nonresidential, high-
rise residential, and hotel/motel buildings, cooling of a space by direct or indirect evaporation of water alone is not
MECHANICAL HEATING is raising the temperature within a space using electric resistance heaters, fossil fuel
burners, heat pumps, or other systems that require energy to directly condition the space.
MERV is the minimum efficiency reporting value as determined by ASHRAE Standard 52.2 Method of Testing
General Ventilation Air-Cleaning Devices for Removal Efficiency by Particle Size.
METAL BUILDING is a complete integrated set of mutually dependent components and assemblies that form a
building, which consists of a steel-framed superstructure and metal skin. This does not include structural glass or
metal panels such as in a curtainwall system.
MICROCHANNEL CONDENSER is an air-cooled condenser for refrigeration systems which utilizes multiple
small parallel gas flow passages in a flat configuration with fin surfaces bonded between the parallel gas passages.
MINISPLIT AIR CONDITIONERS AND HEAT PUMPS are air conditioner or heat pump systems that have a
single outdoor section and one or more indoor sections. The indoor sections cycle on and off in unison in response to
MODELING ASSUMPTIONS are the conditions (such as weather conditions, thermostat settings and schedules,
internal gain schedules, etc.) that are used for calculating a building's annual energy consumption as specified in the
Alternative Calculation Methods (ACM) Approval Manuals.
MULTIPLE-SPLIT AIR CONDITIONERS AND HEAT PUMPS are air conditioner or heat pump systems that
have two or more indoor sections. The indoor sections operate independently and can be used to condition multiple
zones in response to multiple indoor thermostats.
MULTIPLE ZONE SYSTEM is an air distribution system that supplies air to more than one Space Conditioning
Zone, each of which has one or more devices (such as dampers, cooling coils, and heating coils) that regulate
NATURAL GAS AVAILABILITY. For newly constructed buildings, natural gas is available if a gas service line
can be connected to the site without a gas main extension. For addition and alteration, natural gas is available if a gas
service line is connected to the existing building.
SECTION 100.1 – DEFINITIONS AND RULES OF CONSTRUCTION
Page 76 2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards
NEEA is the Northwest Energy Efficiency Alliance.
NEEA ADVANCED WATER HEATER SPECIFICATION is the Northwest Energy Efficiency Alliance
(NEEA) specification version 6.0 for heat pump water heaters.
NET EXHAUST FLOW RATE is the exhaust flow rate for a hood, minus any internal discharge makeup airflow
NEWLY CONDITIONED SPACE is any space being converted from unconditioned to directly conditioned or
indirectly conditioned space. Newly conditioned space must comply with the requirements for an addition. See
Section 141.0 for nonresidential occupancies and Section 150.2 for residential occupancies.
NEWLY CONSTRUCTED BUILDING is a building that has never been used or occupied for any purpose.
NONDUCTED SYSTEM is an air conditioner or heat pump that is permanently installed; directly heats or cools air
within the conditioned space; and uses one or more indoor coils that are mounted on walls or ceilings within the
conditioned space. The system may be of a modular design that allows for combining multiple outdoor coils and
compressors to create one unified system.
NONRESIDENTIAL BUILDING is any building which is identified in the California Building Code Table;
Description of Occupancy as Group A, B, E, F, H, I, M, or S, and is a U; as defined by Part 2 of Title 24 of the
NOTE: Requirements for high-rise residential buildings and hotels/motels are included in the nonresidential sections
NONRESIDENTIAL BUILDING OCCUPANCY TYPES are building types in which a minimum of 90 percent
of the building floor area functions as one of the following, which do not qualify as any other Building Occupancy
Types more specifically defined in Section 100.1, and which do not have a combined total of more than 10 percent of
the area functioning of any Nonresidential Function Areas specifically defined in Section 100.1:
Assembly Building is a building with meeting halls in which people gather for civic, social, or recreational
activities. These include civic centers, convention centers and auditoriums.
Commercial and Industrial Storage Building is a building with building floor areas used for storing items.
Financial Institution Building is a building with floor areas used by an institution which collects funds from
the public and places them in financial assets, such as deposits, loans, and bonds.
Industrial/Manufacturing Facility Building is a building with building floor areas used for performing a craft,
Grocery Store Building is a building with building floor areas used for the display and sale of food.
Gymnasium Building is a building with building floor areas used for physical exercises and recreational sport
Library Building is a building with building floor area used for repository of literary materials, and for reading
reference such as books, periodicals, newspapers, pamphlets and prints.
Office Building is a building of CBC Group B Occupancy with building floor areas in which business, clerical
Parking Garage Building is a building with building floor areas used for parking vehicles, and consists of at
least a roof over the parking area enclosed with walls on all sides. The building includes areas for vehicle
maneuvering to reach designated parking spaces. If the roof of a parking structure is also used for parking, the
section without an overhead roof is considered an outdoor parking lot instead of a parking garage.
Religious Facility Building is a building with building floor areas used for assembly of people to worship.
Restaurant Building is a building with building floor areas in which food and drink are prepared and served to
Retail Store Building is a building with building floor areas used for the display and sale of merchandise except
SECTION 100.1 – DEFINITIONS AND RULES OF CONSTRUCTION
2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards Page 77
School Building is a building used by an educational institution. The building floor area can include classrooms
or educational laboratories, and may include an auditorium, gymnasium, kitchen, library, multipurpose room,
cafeteria, student union, or workroom. A maintenance or storage building is not a school building.
Sports Arena Building is a building with building floor areas used for public viewing of sporting events and
activities. Sports arenas are classified according to the number of spectators they are able to accommodate, as
Class I Facility is used for competition play for 5000 or more spectators.
Class II Facility is used for competition play for up to 5000 spectators.
Class III Facility is used for competition play for up to 2000 spectators.
Class IV Facility is normally used for recreational play and there is limited or no provision for spectators.
Motion Picture Theater Building is a building with building floor areas used for showing motion pictures to
Performance Arts Theater Building is a building with building floor areas used for showing performing arts
that include plays, music or dance to audiences.
NONRESIDENTIAL COMPLIANCE MANUAL is the manual developed by the Commission, under Section
25402.1(e) of the Public Resources Code, to aid designers, builders, and contractors in meeting the energy efficiency
requirements for nonresidential, high-rise residential, and hotel/motel buildings.
NONRESIDENTIAL FUNCTION AREAS are those areas, rooms, and spaces within Nonresidential Buildings that
fall within the following particular definitions, and are defined according to the most specific definition:
Aisle Way is the passage or walkway between storage racks permanently anchored to the floor in a Commercial
or Industrial Storage Building, where the racks are used to store materials such as goods and merchandise.
Atrium is a large-volume indoor space created by openings between two or more stories but is not used for an
enclosed stairway, elevator hoistway, escalator opening, or utility shaft for plumbing, electrical, air-conditioning
Audience Seating Area is a room or area with fixed seats for public meetings or gatherings.
Auditorium Area is a room or area with a stage and fixed seats used for public meetings or gatherings.
Auto Repair / Maintenance Area is an area used to repair or maintain automotive equipment and/or vehicles.
Beauty Salon Area is a room or area in which the primary activity is manicures, pedicures, facials, or the
Civic Meeting Place Area is a space in a government building designed or used for public debate, discussion,
Classroom, Lecture, Training, Vocational Area is a room or area where an audience or class receives
Commercial and Industrial Storage Area includes the following:
Warehouse is a room or areas used for storing of items such as goods, merchandise and materials.
Shipping & Handling is a room or areas used for packing, wrapping, labeling and shipping out goods,
Commercial and Industrial Storage Area (refrigerated) is a room or area used for storing items where
mechanical refrigeration is used to maintain the space temperature at 55° F or less.
Convention, Conference, Multipurpose and Meeting Area are rooms or areas that are designed or used for
meetings, conventions or events, and that have neither fixed seating nor fixed staging.
Copy Room is a room or area used for copying, scanning, or binding documents.
Corridor Area is a passageway or route into which compartments or rooms open.
Dining Areas include the following:
SECTION 100.1 – DEFINITIONS AND RULES OF CONSTRUCTION
Page 78 2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards
Bar/Lounge is a room or area where wait staff serve patrons with liquor, cocktails, wine and beer in a
relaxed atmosphere, usually with tables and chairs.
Fine Dining is a room or area where wait staff serve patrons with meals in an elegant and formal
Cafeteria/Fast Food is a room or area where customers pick up their food at a counter and there is little or
Family Dining is a room or area where wait staff serve patrons with meals in a causal atmosphere.
Electrical/Mechanical/Telephone Room is a room in which the building's electrical switchbox or control
panels, telephone switchbox, and/or HVAC controls or equipment is located.
Exercise/Fitness Center and Gymnasium Area is a room or area equipped for gymnastics, exercise
Financial Transaction Area is a room or area used by an institution that collects funds from the public and
places them in financial assets such as deposits, loans and bonds, and includes tellers, work stations, and
customers' waiting areas; to complete financial transactions. Financial transaction areas do not include private
General Commercial and Industrial Work Area is a room or area in which an art, craft, assembly or
manufacturing operation is performed. Lighting installed in these areas is classified as follows:
High bay: Where the luminaires are 25 feet or more above the floor.
Low bay: Where the luminaires are less than 25 feet above the floor.
Precision: Where visual tasks of small size or fine detail such as electronics assembly, fine woodworking,
metal lathe operation, fine hand painting and finishing, egg processing operations, or tasks of similar visual
Healthcare Facilities may have a room or area as follows:
Exam/Treatment Room is a room or area that does not provide overnight patient care and that is used
to provide physical and mental care through medical, dental, or psychological examination and
treatment, including laboratories and treatment spaces.
Imaging Room is a diagnostic room and area for application and review of results from imaging
technologies including x-ray, ultrasound, computerized tomography (CT), and magnetic resonance
Medical Supply Room is a room or area used for storing medical supplies.
Nursery is a room or area for providing medical care for newly born infants.
Nurse’s Station is a room or area where health care staff work when not directly interacting with
Operating Room is a room or area where surgical operations are carried out in a sterile environment.
This category also applies to veterinary operating rooms.
Patient Room is a room or area that is occupied by one or more patients during a stay in a healthcare
Physical Therapy Room is a room or area for providing physical therapy treatment.
Recovery Room is a room or area that is equipped with apparatus for meeting postoperative
emergencies and in which surgical patients are kept during the immediate postoperative period for care
Hotel Function Area is a hotel room or area such as a hotel ballroom, meeting room, exhibit hall or conference
room, together with prefunction areas and other spaces ancillary to its function.
Kitchen/Food Preparation Area is a room or area with cooking facilities or where food is prepared.
Laundry Area is a room or area primarily designed or used for laundering activities.
SECTION 100.1 – DEFINITIONS AND RULES OF CONSTRUCTION
2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards Page 79
Library Area is a room or area primarily designed or used as a repository for literary materials, such as books,
periodicals, newspapers, pamphlets and prints, kept for reading or reference.
Reading Area is a room or area in a library containing tables, chairs, or desks for patrons to use for the
purpose of reading books and other reference documents. Library reading areas include reading, circulation,
and checkout areas. Reading areas do not include private offices, meeting, photocopy, or other rooms not
used specifically for reading by library patrons.
Stack Area is a room or area in a library with grouping of shelving sections. Stack aisles include pedestrian
Main Entry Lobby is the contiguous area in buildings including hotel/motel that is directly located by the main
entrance of the building through which persons must pass, including any ancillary reception, waiting and seating
Locker Room is a room or area for changing clothing, sometimes equipped with lockers.
Lounge/Breakroom or Waiting Area is a room or area in which people sit, wait and relax.
Mall is a roofed or covered common pedestrian area within a mall building that serves as access for two or more
Multipurpose Room is a room that can be used for multipurpose activities such as meetings, instructional
activities and social gatherings. Multipurpose rooms are typically found in offices, schools, convention centers,
Museum Areas include the following:
Exhibit/Display is a room or area in a museum that has for its primary purpose exhibitions, having neither
fixed seating nor fixed staging. An exhibit does not include a gallery or other place where art is for sale. An
exhibit does not include a lobby, conference room, or other occupancies where the primary function is not
Restoration Room is a room or area in which the primary function is the care of works of artistic,
historical, or scientific value. A restoration does not include a gallery or other place where art is for sale. A
restoration does not include a lobby, conference room, or other occupancies where the primary function is
not the care or exhibit of works of artistic, historical, or scientific value.
Office Area is a room or area in a building of CBC Group B Occupancy in which business, clerical or
Parking Garage Areas include the following:
Parking Zone in a Parking Garage is used for the purpose of parking and maneuvering of vehicles on a
single floor. Parking areas include sloping floors of a parking garage. Parking areas do not include Daylight
Transition Zones, Dedicated Ramps, or the roof of a Parking Garage, which may be present in a Parking
Daylight Adaptation Zone in a Parking Garage is the interior path of travel for vehicles to enter a parking
garage as needed to transition from exterior daylight levels to interior light levels. Daylight Transition
Zones only include the path of vehicular travel and do not include adjacent Parking Areas.
Dedicated Ramps in Parking Garages are driveways specifically for the purpose of moving vehicles
between floors of a parking garage and which have no adjacent parking. Dedicated ramps do not include
sloping floors of a parking structure, which are considered Parking Areas.
Pharmacy Area is a room or area where medicinal drugs are dispensed and sold, usually in a retail store.
Religious Worship Area is a room or area in which the primary function is for an assembly of people to
worship. Religious worship does not include classrooms, offices, or other areas in which the primary function is
not for an assembly of people to worship.
Restroom is a room providing personal facilities such as toilets and washbasins.
Retail Sales Areas include the following:
SECTION 100.1 – DEFINITIONS AND RULES OF CONSTRUCTION
Page 80 2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards
Grocery Sales is a room or area that has as its primary purpose the sale of foodstuffs requiring additional
Retail Merchandise Sales is a room or area in which the primary activity is the sale of merchandise.
Fitting Room is a room or area where the retail customers try out clothing before purchasing.
Server Room is a room smaller than 500 square feet, within a larger building, in which networking equipment
and Information Technology (IT) server equipment is housed, and a minimum of five IT servers are installed in
Server Aisle is an aisle of racks of Information Technology (IT) server equipment in a Server Room. While
networking equipment may also be housed on these racks, it is largely a room to manage server equipment.
Playing Area for Sports Arena is an area where sports are played in front an audience.
Scientific Laboratory Area is a room or area where research, experiments, and measurement in medical and
physical sciences are performed requiring examination of fine details. The area may include workbenches,
countertops, scientific instruments, and associated floor spaces. Scientific laboratory does not refer to film,
computer, and other laboratories where scientific experiments are not performed.
Stairs is a series of steps providing passage for persons from one level of a building to another, including
Stairwell is a vertical shaft in which stairs are located.
Support Area is a room or area used as a passageway, utility room, storage space, or other type of space
associated with or secondary to the function of an occupancy that is listed in these regulations.
Tenant Lease Area is a room or area in a building intended for lease for which a specific tenant is not identified
at the time of building permit application.
Theater Areas include the following:
Motion Picture Theater is an assembly room or area with rows of seats for the showing of motion pictures.
Performance Theater is an assembly room or area with rows of seats for the viewing of dramatic
performances, lectures, musical events and similar live performances.
Transportation Function Areas include the following:
Baggage Area is a room or area in a transportation facility such as an airport where the travelers reclaim
Ticketing Area is a room or area in a transportation facility such as an airport or a train station where travelers
purchase tickets, check in baggage, or inquire about travel information.
Videoconferencing Studio is a room or area with permanently installed videoconferencing cameras, audio
equipment, and playback equipment for both audio-based and video-based two-way communication between
NONSTANDARD PART LOAD VALUE (NPLV) is a single- number part-load efficiency figure of merit for
chillers referenced to conditions other than IPLV conditions. (See "integrated part load value.")
OCCUPANCY is the purpose for which a building or part thereof is used or intended to be used.
OCCUPANCY, HUMAN is any occupancy that is intended primarily for human activities.
OCCUPANCY GROUP is a classification of occupancy defined in Chapter 3 of the CBC (Title 24, Part 2).
OCCUPANCY TYPE is a description of occupancy that is more specific than occupancy group and that relates to
determining the amount of lighting, ventilation, or other services needed for that portion of the building.
OCCUPIABLE SPACE is any enclosed space that is intended for human occupancy, including all habitable spaces
as well as bathrooms, toilets, closets, halls, storage and utility areas, laundry areas, and similar areas. (See also
OCCUPIED STANDBY MODE is when a zone is scheduled to be occupied and an occupant sensor indicates zero
SECTION 100.1 – DEFINITIONS AND RULES OF CONSTRUCTION
2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards Page 81
ONLINE CAPACITY is the total combined capacity in actual cubic feet per minute of compressed air at a given
pressure from all online compressors.
ONLINE COMPRESSORS are all the compressors that are physically connected to compressed air piping and are
available to serve peak load. Online compressors do not include back up compressors whose only purpose is to be
available when an online compressor fails.
OPEN COOLING TOWER is an open, or direct contact, cooling tower which exposes water directly to the cooling
atmosphere, thereby transferring the source heat load from the water directly to the air by a combination of heat and
OPENADR 2.0a is the OpenADR Alliance document titled, “OpenADR 2.0 Profile Specification A Profile,” 2011.
OPENADR 2.0b is the OpenADR Alliance document titled, “OpenADR 2.0 Profile Specification B Profile,” 2015.
OPERABLE FENESTRATION is designed to be opened or closed.
OPTIMUM START CONTROLS are controls that are designed to automatically adjust the start time of a space
conditioning system each day with the intent of bringing the space to desired occupied temperature levels at the
OPTIMUM STOP CONROLS are controls that are designed to setup or setback thermostat setpoints before
scheduled unoccupied periods based upon the thermal lag and acceptable drift in space temperature that is within
OSHPD is the California Office of Statewide Health Planning and Development
ORIENTATION, CARDINAL is one of the four principal directional indicators, north, east, south, and west,
which are marked on a compass, also called cardinal directions.
ORIENTATION, EAST-FACING is oriented to within 45° of true east, including 45°00'00" south of east (SE), but
ORIENTATION, NORTH-FACING is oriented to within 45° of true north, including 45°00'00" east of north
ORIENTATION, SOUTH-FACING is oriented to within 45° of true south including 45°00'00" west of south
ORIENTATION, WEST-FACING is oriented to within 45° of true west, including 45°00'00" north of due west
OUTDOOR AIR (Outside air) is air taken from outdoors and not previously circulated in the building.
OUTDOOR LIGHTING is electrical lighting used to illuminate outdoor areas.
OUTDOOR AREAS are areas external to a building. These include but are not limited to the following areas:
Building entrance way is the external area of any operable doorway in or out of a building, including overhead
doors. These areas serve any doorway, set of doors (including elevator doors such as in parking garages),
turnstile, vestibule, or other form of portal that is ordinarily used to gain access to the building by its users and
occupants. Where buildings have separate one-way doors to enter and to leave, this also includes any area
serving any doors ordinarily used to leave the building.
Building façade is the exterior surfaces of a building, not including horizontal roofing, signs, and surfaces not
visible from any public accessible viewing location.
Canopy is a permanent structure, other than a parking garage area, consisting of a roof and supporting building
elements, with the area beneath at least partially open to the elements. A canopy may be freestanding or attached
to surrounding structures. A canopy roof may serve as the floor of a structure above.
Carport is a covered, open-sided structure designed or used primarily for the purpose of parking vehicles,
having a roof over the parking area. Typically, carports are free-standing or projected from the side of the
building and are only two or fewer car lengths deep. A Carport is not a Garage.
SECTION 100.1 – DEFINITIONS AND RULES OF CONSTRUCTION
Page 82 2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards
Hardscape is the area of an improvement to a site that is paved or has other structural features such as curbs,
plazas, entries, parking lots, site roadways, driveways, walkways, sidewalks, bikeways, water features and pools,
storage or service yards, loading docks, amphitheaters, outdoor sales lots, and private monuments and statuary.
Outdoor sales frontage is the portion of the perimeter of an outdoor sales area immediately adjacent to a public
Outdoor sales lot is an uncovered paved area used exclusively for the display of vehicles, equipment or other
merchandise for sale. All internal and adjacent access drives, walkway areas, employee and customer parking
areas, vehicle service or storage areas are not outdoor sales lot areas, but are considered hardscape.
Parking lot is an uncovered area for the purpose of parking vehicles. Parking lot is a type of hardscape.
Paved area is an area that is paved with concrete, asphalt, stone, brick, gravel, or other improved wearing
Principal viewing location is anywhere along the adjacent highway, street, road or sidewalk running parallel to
Public monuments are statuary, buildings, structures, and/or hardscape on public land.
Outdoor Sales canopy is a canopy specifically to cover and protect an outdoor sales area.
Stairways and Ramps. Stairways are one or more flights of stairs with the necessary landings and platforms
connecting them to form a continuous and uninterrupted passage from one level to another. An exterior stairway
is open on at least one side, except for required structural columns, beams, handrails and guards. The adjoining
open areas shall be either yards, courts or public ways. The other sides of the exterior stairway need not be open.
Ramps are walking surfaces with a slope steeper than 5 percent.
Vehicle service station is a gasoline, natural gas, diesel, or other fuel dispensing station.
OUTDOOR LIGHTING ZONE is a geographic area designated by the California Energy Commission in
accordance with Part 1, Section 10-114, that determines requirements for outdoor lighting, including lighting power
densities and specific control, equipment or performance requirements. Lighting zones are numbered LZ0, LZ1,
OVERHANG is a contiguous opaque surface, oriented horizontally and projecting outward horizontally from an
OVERHANG PROJECTION is the horizontal distance, measured outward horizontally from the surface of
exposed exterior glazing at the head of a window to the outward edge of an overhang.
OVERHANG RISE is the vertical distance between the projected edge of an overhang and the sill of the vertical
PART 1 means Part 1 of Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations.
PART 6 means Part 6 of Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations.
PART-LOAD OPERATION occurs when a system or device is operating below its maximum rated capacity.
PARTICLE SIZE EFFICIENCY is the fraction (percentage) of particles that are captured on air filter equipment
as determined during rating tests conducted in accordance with ASHRAE Standard 52.2 or AHRI Standard 680.
Particle Size Efficiency is measured in three particle size ranges: 0.3-1.0, 1.0-3.0, 3.0-10 microns.
POOLS, ANSI/NSPI-5 is the American National Standards Institute and National Spa and Pool Institute document
titled “American National Standard for Residential Inground Swimming Pools” 2016 (ANSI/NSPI-5 2016).
POOLS, AUXILIARY POOL LOADS are features or devices that circulate pool water in addition to that required
for pool filtration, including, but not limited to, solar pool heating systems, filter backwashing, pool cleaners,
POOLS, BACKWASH VALVE is a diverter valve designed to backwash filters located between the circulation
pump and the filter, including, but not limited to, slide, push-pull, multiport, and full-flow valves.
POOLS, MULTISPEED PUMP is a pump capable of operating at two or more speeds and includes two-speed and
SECTION 100.1 – DEFINITIONS AND RULES OF CONSTRUCTION
2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards Page 83
POOLS, NSF/ANSI 50 is the NSF International (formerly National Sanitation Foundation) Standard and American
National Standards Institute document titled “Circulation System Components and Related Materials for Swimming
POOLS, RESIDENTIAL are permanently installed residential in-ground swimming pools intended for use by a
single-family home for noncommercial purposes and with dimensions as defined in ANSI/NSPI-5.
PRESSURE BOUNDARY is the primary air enclosure boundary separating indoor and outdoor air. For example, a
volume that has more leakage to the outside than to the conditioned space would be considered outside the pressure
boundary. Exposed earth in a crawl space or basement shall not be considered part of the pressure boundary.
PRIMARY AIRFLOW is the airflow (cfm or L/s) supplied to the zone from the air-handling unit at which the
outdoor air intake is located. It includes outdoor intake air and recirculated air from that air-handling unit but does
not include air transferred or air recirculated to the zone by other means.
PRIMARY STORAGE is compressed air storage located upstream of the distribution system and any pressure flow
PROCESS is an activity or treatment that is not related to the space conditioning, lighting, service water heating, or
ventilating of a building as it relates to human occupancy.
PROCESS BOILER is a type of boiler with a capacity (rated maximum input) of 300,000 Btus per hour (Btu/h) or
PROCESS, COVERED is a process that is regulated under Part 6, Sections 120.6 and 140.9, which includes
computer rooms, data centers, elevators, escalators and moving walkways, laboratories, enclosed parking garages,
commercial kitchens, refrigerated warehouses, commercial refrigeration, compressed air systems, and process
PROCESS, EXEMPT is a process that is not a covered process regulated under Part 6.
PROCESS LOAD is an energy load resulting from a process.
PROCESS SPACE is a nonresidential space that is designed to be thermostatically controlled to maintain a process
environment temperature less than 55º F or to maintain a process environment temperature greater than 90º F for the
whole space that the system serves, or that is a space with a space-conditioning system designed and controlled to be
incapable of operating at temperatures above 55º F or incapable of operating at temperatures below 90º F at design
PROPOSED DESIGN BUILDING is a building that is simulated by Commission-approved compliance software
to determine the energy consumption resulting from all of the characteristics and energy consuming features that are
actually proposed for a building, as specified by the Alternative Calculation Method (ACM) Approval Manual.
PUBLIC AREAS are spaces generally open to the public at large, customers or congregation members, or similar
spaces where occupants need to be prevented from controlling lights for safety, security, or business reasons.
R-VALUE is the measure of the thermal resistance of insulation or any material or building component expressed in
RADIANT BARRIER is a highly reflective, low emitting material installed at the underside surface of the roof
deck and the inside surface of gable ends or other exterior vertical surfaces in attics to reduce solar heat gain.
RAISED FLOOR is a floor (partition) over a crawl space, or an unconditioned space, or ambient air.
READILY ACCESSIBLE is capable of being reached quickly for operation, repair or inspection, without requiring
climbing or removing obstacles, or resorting to access equipment.
RECOOL is the cooling of air that has been previously heated by space-conditioning equipment or systems serving
RECOVERED ENERGY is energy used in a building that (1) is recovered from space conditioning, service water
heating, lighting, or process equipment after the energy has performed its original function; (2) provides space
conditioning, service water heating, or lighting; and (3) would otherwise be wasted.
REFERENCE APPENDICES is the support document for the Building Energy Efficiency Standards and the ACM
Approval Manuals. The document consists of three sections: the Reference Joint Appendices (JA), the Reference
Residential Appendices (RA), and the Reference Nonresidential Appendices (NA).
SECTION 100.1 – DEFINITIONS AND RULES OF CONSTRUCTION
Page 84 2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards
REFLECTANCE, SOLAR is the ratio of the reflected solar flux to the incident solar flux.
REFRIGERATED CASE is a manufactured commercial refrigerator or freezer, including but not limited to display
cases, reach-in cabinets, meat cases, and frozen food and soda fountain units.
REFRIGERATED SPACE is a space constructed for storage or handling of products, where mechanical
refrigeration is used to maintain the space temperature at 55° F or less.
REFRIGERATED WAREHOUSE is a building or a space greater than or equal to 3,000 square feet constructed
for storage or handling of products, where mechanical refrigeration is used to maintain the space temperature at 55°
REHEAT is the heating of air that has been previously cooled by cooling equipment or supplied by an economizer.
RELOCATABLE PUBLIC SCHOOL BUILDING is a relocatable building as defined by Title 24, Part 1, Section
REPAIR is the reconstruction or renewal for the purpose of maintenance of any component, system, or equipment of
an existing building. Repairs shall not increase the preexisting energy consumption of the repaired component,
system, or equipment. Replacement of any component, system, or equipment for which there are requirements in the
Standards is considered an alteration and not a repair.
RESIDENTIAL BUILDING (See “high-rise residential building” and “low-rise residential building.”)
RESIDENTIAL COMPLIANCE MANUAL is the manual developed by the Commission, under Section 25402.1
of the Public Resources Code, to aid designers, builders, and contractors in meeting Energy Efficiency Standards for
RESIDENTIAL SPACE TYPE is one of the following:
Bathroom is a room or area containing a sink used for personal hygiene, toilet, shower, or a tub.
Closet is a nonhabitable room used for the storage of linens, household supplies, clothing, nonperishable food,
or similar uses, and which is not a hallway or passageway.
Garage is a nonhabitable building or portion of building, attached to or detached from a residential dwelling
unit, in which motor vehicles are parked.
Kitchen is a room or area used for cooking, food storage and preparation and washing dishes, including
associated counter tops and cabinets, refrigerator, stove, ovens, and floor area.
Laundry is a nonhabitable room or space which contains plumbing and electrical connections for a washing
Storage building is a nonhabitable detached building used for the storage of tools, garden equipment, or
Utility room is a nonhabitable room or building which contains only HVAC, plumbing, or electrical controls or
equipment; and which is not a bathroom, closet, garage, or laundry room.
RESNET 380 is the Residential Energy Services Network document titled “Standard for Testing Airtightness of
Building Enclosures, Airtightness of Heating and Cooling Air Distribution Systems, and Airflow of Mechanical
ROOF is the outside cover of a building or structure including the structural supports, decking, and top layer that is
exposed to the outside with a slope less than 60° from the horizontal.
ROOF, LOW-SLOPED is a roof that has a ratio of rise to run of less than 2:12 (9.5° from the horizontal).
ROOF, STEEP-SLOPED is a roof that has a ratio of rise to run of greater than or equal to 2:12 (9.5° from the
ROOFING PRODUCT is the top layer of the roof that is exposed to the outside, which has properties including but
not limited to solar reflectance, thermal emittance, and mass.
ROOF RECOVER BOARD is a rigid type board, installed directly below a low-sloped roof membrane, with or
without above deck thermal insulation, to: (a) improve a roof system's compressive strength, (b) physically separate
SECTION 100.1 – DEFINITIONS AND RULES OF CONSTRUCTION
2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards Page 85
the roof membrane from the thermal insulation, or (c) physically separate a new roof covering from an underlying
roof membrane as part of a roof overlay project.
RUNOUT is piping that is no more than 12 feet long and that connects to a fixture or an individual terminal unit.
SAE J1772 is the SAE International document titled “SAE Electric Vehicle and Plug in Hybrid Electric Vehicle
SATURATED CONDENSING TEMPERATURE (also known as CONDENSING TEMPERATURE) is: (a)
for single component and azeotropic refrigerants, the saturation temperature corresponding to the refrigerant pressure
at the condenser entrance, or (b) for zeotropic refrigerants, the arithmetic average of the Dew Point and Bubble Point
temperatures corresponding to the refrigerant pressure at the condenser entrance.
SCIENTIFIC EQUIPMENT is measurement, testing or metering equipment used for scientific research or
investigation, including but not limited to manufactured cabinets, carts and racks.
SEASONAL ENERGY EFFICIENCY RATIO (SEER) is the total cooling output of an air conditioner in Btu
during its normal usage period for cooling divided by the total electrical energy input in watt-hours during the same
period, as determined using the applicable test method in the Appliance Efficiency Regulations.
SERVICE WATER HEATING is heating of water for sanitary purposes for human occupancy, other than for
SHADING is the protection from heat gains because of direct solar radiation by permanently attached exterior
devices or building elements, interior shading devices, glazing material, or adherent materials.
SHADING COEFFICIENT (SC) is the ratio of the solar heat gain through a fenestration product to the solar heat
gain through an unshaded 1/8-inch-thick clear double strength glass under the same set of conditions. For
nonresidential, high-rise residential, and hotel/motel buildings, this shall exclude the effects of mullions, frames,
sashes, and interior and exterior shading devices.
SIDELIT DAYLIT ZONE, PRIMARY is the area in plan view directly adjacent to each vertical glazing, one
window head height deep into the area, and window width plus 0.5 times window head height wide on each side of
the rough opening of the window, minus any area on a plan beyond a permanent obstruction that is 6 feet or taller as
SIDELIT DAYLIT ZONE, SECONDARY is the area in plan view directly adjacent to each vertical glazing, two
window head heights deep into the area, and window width plus 0.5 times window head height wide on each side of
the rough opening of the window, minus any area on a plan beyond a permanent obstruction that is 6 feet or taller as
SIGN definitions include the following:
Electronic Message Center (EMC) is a pixilated image producing electronically controlled sign formed by any
light source. Bare lamps used to create linear lighting animation sequences through the use of chaser circuits,
also known as “chaser lights” are not considered an EMC.
Illuminated face is a side of a sign that has the message on it. For an exit sign it is the side that has the word
Sign, cabinet is an internally illuminated sign consisting of frame and face, with a continuous translucent
message panel, also referred to as a panel sign.
Sign, channel letter is an internally illuminated sign with multiple components, each built in the shape of an
individual three dimensional letter or symbol that are each independently illuminated, with a separate translucent
panel over the light source for each element.
Sign, double-faced is a sign with two parallel opposing faces.
Sign, externally illuminated is any sign or a billboard that is lit by a light source that is external to the sign
directed towards and shining on the face of the sign.
Sign, internally illuminated is a sign that is illuminated by a light source that is contained inside the sign where
the message area is luminous, including cabinet signs and channel letter signs.
Sign, traffic is a sign for traffic direction, warning, and roadway identification.
SECTION 100.1 – DEFINITIONS AND RULES OF CONSTRUCTION
Page 86 2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards
Sign, unfiltered is a sign where the viewer perceives the light source directly as the message, without any
colored filter between the viewer and the light source, including neon, cold cathode, and LED signs.
SINGLE FAMILY RESIDENCE is a building that is of Occupancy Group R-3.
SINGLE PACKAGE VERTICAL AIR CONDITIONER (SPVAC): Is a type of air-cooled small or large
commercial package air-conditioning and heating equipment; factory assembled as a single package having its major
components arranged vertically, which is an encased combination of cooling and optional heating components; is
intended for exterior mounting on, adjacent interior to, or through an outside wall; and is powered by single or three-
phase current. It may contain separate indoor grille, outdoor louvers, various ventilation options, indoor free air
discharge, ductwork, wall plenum, or sleeve. Heating components may include electrical resistance, steam, hot water,
gas, or no heat but may not include reverse cycle refrigeration as a heating means.
SINGLE PACKAGE VERTICAL HEAT PUMP (SPVHP): Is an SPVAC that utilizes reverse cycle refrigeration
as its primary heat source, with secondary supplemental heating by means of electrical resistance, steam, hot water,
SINGLE ZONE SYSTEM is an air distribution system that supplies air to one thermal zone.
SITE-BUILT is fenestration designed to be field-glazed or field assembled units using specific factory cut or
otherwise factory formed framing and glazing units that are manufactured with the intention of being assembled at
the construction site. These include storefront systems, curtain walls and atrium roof systems.
SITE SOLAR ENERGY is thermal, chemical, or electrical energy derived from direct conversion of incident solar
SKYLIGHT is fenestration installed on a roof less than 60° from the horizontal.
SKYLIGHT AREA is the area of the rough opening for the skylight.
SKYLIGHT TYPE is one of the following three types of skylights: glass mounted on a curb, glass not mounted on
SKYLIT DAYLIT ZONE is the rough area in plan view under each skylight, plus 0.7 times the average ceiling
height in each direction from the edge of the rough opening of the skylight, minus any area on a plan beyond a
permanent obstruction that is taller than one-half of the distance from the floor to the bottom of the skylight. The
bottom of the skylight is measured from the bottom of the skylight well for skylights having wells, or the bottom of
the skylight if no skylight well exists. For the purpose of determining the skylit daylit zone, the geometric shape of
the skylit daylit zone shall be identical to the plan view geometric shape of the rough opening of the skylight; for
example, for a rectangular skylight the skylit daylit zone plan area shall be rectangular, and for a circular skylight the
skylit daylit zone plan area shall be circular. For skylight located in an atrium, the skylit daylit zone shall include the
floor area directly under the atrium, and the area of the top floor that is directly under the skylight, plus 0.7 times the
average ceiling height of the top floor, in each direction from the edge of the rough opening of the skylight, minus
any area on a plan beyond a permanent obstruction that is taller than one-half of the distance from the top floor to the
SMACNA is the Sheet Metal and Air-Conditioning Contractors National Association.
SMACNA HVAC DUCT CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS is the Sheet Metal Contractors’ National Association
document "HVAC Duct Construction Standards Metal and Flexible - 3rd Edition," 2006 (2006 ANSI/SMACNA-
006-2006 HVAC Duct Construction Standards Metal and Flexible 3rd Edition).
SMACNA RESIDENTIAL COMFORT SYSTEM INSTALLATION STANDARDS is the Sheet Metal
Contractors’ National Association document titled “Residential Comfort System Installation Standards, Eighth
SOCIAL SERVICES BUILDING is a space where public assistance and social services are provided to individuals
SOLAR ELECTRIC GENERATION SYSTEM or PHOTOVOLTAIC SYSTEM is the complete set of all
components for converting sunlight into electricity through the photovoltaic process, including the array of panels,
inverter(s) and the balance of system components required to enable the system to effectively deliver power to
reduce a building’s consumption of electricity from the utility grid.
SECTION 100.1 – DEFINITIONS AND RULES OF CONSTRUCTION
2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards Page 87
SOLAR REFLECTANCE INDEX (SRI) is a measure of the roof's ability to reject solar heat which includes both
SOLAR SAVINGS FRACTION (SSF) is the fraction of domestic hot water demand provided by a solar water-
SOLAR ZONE is a section of the roof designated and reserved for the future installation of a solar electric or solar
SPA is a vessel that contains heated water in which humans can immerse themselves, is not a pool, and is not a
SPACE-CONDITIONING SYSTEM is a system that provides heating, or cooling within or associated with
conditioned spaces in a building, and may incorporate use of components such as chillers/compressors, fluid
distribution systems (e.g., air ducts, water piping, refrigerant piping), pumps, air handlers, cooling and heating coils,
air or water cooled condensers, economizers, terminal units, and associated controls.
STANDARD DESIGN BUILDING is a building that is automatically simulated by Commission-approved
compliance software to establish the Energy Budget that is the maximum energy consumption allowed by a Proposed
Design Building to comply with the Title 24 Building Energy Efficiency Standards. The Standard Design building is
simulated using the same location and having the same characteristics of the Proposed Design building, but assuming
minimal compliance with the mandatory and prescriptive requirements that are applicable to the proposed building,
as specified by the Alternative Calculation Methods Approval Manual.
STORAGE, COLD, is a storage area within a refrigerated warehouse where space temperatures are maintained at or
STORAGE, FROZEN is a storage area within a refrigerated warehouse where the space temperatures are
TENANT SPACE is a portion of a building occupied by a tenant.
THERMAL MASS is solid or liquid material with a high overall heat capacity to store energy for heating or cooling
THERMAL RESISTANCE (R) is a measurement of the resistance over time of a material or building component
THERMOSTAT is an automatic control device or system used to maintain temperature at a fixed or adjustable
THERMOSTATIC EXPANSION VALVE (TXV) is a refrigerant metering valve, installed in an air conditioner or
heat pump, which controls the flow of liquid refrigerant entering the evaporator in response to the superheat of the
TIME DEPENDENT VALUATION (TDV) ENERGY is the time varying energy caused to be used by the
building to provide space conditioning and water heating and for specified buildings lighting. TDV energy accounts
for the energy used at the building site and consumed in producing and in delivering energy to a site, including, but
not limited to, power generation, transmission and distribution losses.
TINTED GLASS is colored glass by incorporation of a mineral admixture resulting in a degree of tinting. Any
tinting reduces both visible and radiant transmittance.
TOTAL HEAT OF REJECTION (THR) is the heat rejected by refrigeration system compressors at design
conditions, consisting of the design cooling capacity plus the heat of compression added by the compressors.
TOWNHOUSE is a single-family dwelling unit constructed in a group of three or more attached units in which each
unit extends from the foundation to roof and with open space on at least two sides.
TRANSCRITICAL CO2 REFRIGERATION SYSTEM is a type of refrigeration system that uses CO
refrigerant where the ultimate heat rejection to ambient air can take place above the critical point.
TRANSCRITICAL MODE is a system operating condition for a refrigeration system wherein the
refrigerant pressure and temperature leaving the compressor is such that the refrigerant is at or above the
critical point. Typically used in reference to CO refrigeration systems.
SECTION 100.1 – DEFINITIONS AND RULES OF CONSTRUCTION
Page 88 2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards
SUBCRITICAL MODE is a system operating condition for a refrigeration system wherein the refrigerant
pressure and temperature leaving the compressor is such that the refrigerant is below the critical point.
Typically used in reference to CO refrigeration systems.
TRIM COMPRESSOR is a compressor that is designated for part-load operation, handling the short term variable
trim load of end uses, in addition to the fully loaded base compressors.
U-FACTOR is the overall coefficient of thermal transmittance of a fenestration, wall, floor, or roof/ceiling
component, in Btu/(hr × ft² × ºF), including air film resistance at both surfaces.
UL 181 is the Underwriters Laboratories document titled “Standard for Factory-Made Air Ducts and Air
UL 181A is the Underwriters Laboratories document titled “Standard Closure Systems for Use With Rigid Air
UL 181B is the Underwriters Laboratories document titled “Standard Closure Systems for Use With Flexible Air
UL 723 is the Underwriters Laboratories document titled “Standard for Test for Surface Burning Characteristics,”
UL 727 is the Underwriters Laboratories document titled “Standard for Oil-Fired Central Furnaces,” 2006.UL 731 is
the Underwriters Laboratories document titled “Standard for Oil-Fired Unit Heaters,” 2012.
UL 1077 is the Underwriters Laboratories document titled “Standard for Supplementary Protectors for Use in
UL 1574 is the Underwriters Laboratories document entitled "Track Lighting Systems," 2016.
UL 1598 is the Underwriters Laboratories document titled “Luminaires,” 2012.
UL 2108 is the Underwriters Laboratories document titled “Standard for Low Voltage Lighting Systems,” 2017.
UL 8750 is the Underwriters Laboratories document titled “Standards for Light Emitting Diode (LED) Equipment
UNCONDITIONED SPACE is enclosed space within a building that is not directly conditioned, or indirectly
USDOE 10 CFR 430 is the regulation issued by Department of Energy and available in the Code of Federal
Regulation - Title 10, Chapter II, Subchapter D, Part 430 – Energy Conservation Program for Consumer Products.
Relevant testing methodologies are specified in “Appendix N to subpart B of Part 430 – Uniform test method for
measuring the energy consumption of furnaces and boilers.”
USDOE 10 CFR 431 is the regulation issued by Department of Energy and available in the Code of Federal
Regulation - Title 10, Chapter II, Subchapter D, Part 431 - Energy Conservation Program for Certain Commercial
and Industrial equipment. Relevant testing methodologies are specified in “Subpart E to Part 431 – Uniform test
method for the measurement of energy efficiency of commercial packaged boilers.”
VAPOR RETARDER CLASS is a measure of the ability of a material or assembly to limit the amount of moisture
that passes through the material or assembly meeting Section 202 of the California Building Code.
VARIABLE AIR VOLUME (VAV) SYSTEM is a space-conditioning system that maintains comfort levels by
varying the volume of supply air to the zones served.
VENDING MACHINE is a machine for vending and dispensing refrigerated or nonrefrigerated food and beverages
VENTILATION SYSTEM, BALANCED is a mechanical device intended to remove air from buildings, and
simultaneously replace it with outdoor air.
VENTILATION SYSTEM, CENTRAL FAN INTEGRATED, or CFI is a central fan forced air space
conditioning system that also intends to bring outdoor air into buildings, causing indoor air to flow out of the
building through ventilation relief outlets or normal leakage paths through the building envelope.
SECTION 100.1 – DEFINITIONS AND RULES OF CONSTRUCTION
2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards Page 89
VENTILATION SYSTEM, ENERGY RECOVERY, or ERV is a mechanical device intended to remove air from
buildings, simultaneously replace it with outdoor air, and in the process transfer heat from the warmer to the colder
of the simultaneous airflows and transfer moisture from the most humid to least humid of the simultaneous airflows.
VENTILATION SYSTEM, EXHAUST is a mechanical device intended to remove air from buildings, causing
outdoor air to enter by ventilation inlets or normal leakage paths through the building envelope.
VENTILATION SYSTEM, HEAT RECOVERY, or HRV is a mechanical device intended to remove air from
buildings, simultaneously replace it with outdoor air, and in the process transfer heat from the warmer to the colder
VENTILATION SYSTEM, SUPPLY is a mechanical device intended to bring outdoor air into buildings, causing
indoor air to flow out of the building through ventilation relief outlets or normal leakage paths through the building
VERY VALUABLE MERCHANDISE is rare or precious objects, including, but not limited to, jewelry, coins,
small art objects, crystal, ceramics, or silver, the selling of which involves customer inspection of very fine detail
VIRTUAL END NODE (VEN) is an interface with a demand responsive control system that accepts signals
transmitted through OpenADR, consistent with the specifications in OpenADR 2.0a or 2.0b.
WALL TYPE is a type of wall assembly having a specific heat capacity, framing type, and U-factor.
WATER BALANCE IN EVAPORATIVE COOLING TOWERS The water balance of a cooling tower is:
M = makeup water (from the mains water supply)
WINDOW FILM is fenestration attachment products that consists of a flexible adhesive-backed polymer film
which may be applied to the interior or exterior surface of an existing glazing system.
WOOD HEATER is an enclosed wood-burning appliance used for space heating and/or domestic water heating.
ZONE, CRITICAL is a zone serving a process where reset of the zone temperature setpoint during a demand shed
event might disrupt the process, including but not limited to computer rooms, data centers, telecom and private
ZONE, NONCRITICAL is a zone that is not a critical zone.
ZONE, SPACE-CONDITIONING, is a space or group of spaces within a building with sufficiently similar
comfort conditioning requirements so that comfort conditions, as specified in Section 140.4(b)3 or 150.0(h), as
applicable, can be maintained throughout the zone by a single controlling device.
SECTION 100.1 – DEFINITIONS AND RULES OF CONSTRUCTION
Page 90 2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards
SYSTEMS ASSESMENT & FACILITIES SITING DIVISION
Climate Zones for Residential and Nonresidential Occupancies
SECTION 100.1 – DEFINITIONS AND RULES OF CONSTRUCTION
2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards Page 91
SECTION 100.2 – CALCULATION OF TIME DEPENDENT VALUATION
Time Dependent Valuation (TDV) energy shall be used to compare proposed designs to their energy budget when
using the performance compliance approach. TDV energy is calculated by multiplying the site energy use (electricity
kWh, natural gas therms, or fuel oil or LPG gallons) for each energy type times the applicable TDV multiplier. TDV
multipliers vary for each hour of the year and by energy type (electricity, natural gas or propane), by Climate Zone
and by building type (low-rise residential or nonresidential, high-rise residential or hotel/motel). TDV multipliers are
summarized in Reference Joint Appendix JA3. TDV multipliers for propane shall be used for all energy obtained
from depletable sources other than electricity and natural gas.
SECTION 100.2 – CALCULATION OF TIME DEPENDENT VALUATION (TDV) ENERGY
Page 92 2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards
FOR THE MANUFACTURE, CONSTRUCTION AND
Sections 110.1 through 110.12 specify requirements for manufacturing, construction, and installation of certain
systems, equipment, appliances and building components that are installed in buildings within the scope of Section
NOTE: The requirements of Sections 110.0 through 110.12 apply to newly constructed buildings. Sections 141.0
and 150.2 specify which requirements of Sections 110.1 through 110.12 also apply to additions and alterations to
(a) General Requirements. Systems, equipment, appliances and building components shall only be installed in a
building within the scope of Section 100.0(a) if:
1. The manufacturer has certified that the system, equipment, appliances or building component complies with
the applicable manufacturing provisions of Sections 110.1 through 110.12, and
2. The system, equipment, appliance or building component complies with all applicable installation
(b) Certification Requirements for Manufactured Systems, Equipment, Appliances and Building
1. Appliances that are within the scope of Section 1601 of the Appliance Efficiency Regulations shall only be
installed if they have been certified to the Energy Commission by the manufacturer, pursuant to the provisions
of Title 20 California Code of Regulations, Section 1606; or
2. Systems, equipment, appliances and building components that are required by Part 6 or the Reference
Appendices to be certified to the Energy Commission, which are not appliances that are within the scope of
Section 1601 of the Appliance Efficiency Regulations, shall only be installed if they are certified by the
manufacturer in a declaration, executed under penalty of perjury under the laws of the State of California, that:
A. all the information provided pursuant to the certification is true, complete, accurate and in compliance with
all applicable requirements of Part 6; and
B. the equipment, product, or device was tested using the test procedure specified in Part 6 if applicable.
3. The certification status of any system, equipment, appliance or building component shall be confirmed only by
A. A directory published or approved by the Commission; or
B. A copy of the application for certification from the manufacturer and the letter of acceptance from the
C. Written confirmation from the publisher of a Commission-approved directory that a device has been
NOTE: Part 6 does not require a builder, designer, owner, operator, or enforcing agency to test any certified device to
determine its compliance with minimum specifications or efficiencies adopted by the Commission.
2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards Page 93
Page 94 2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards
SECTION 110.1 – MANDATORY REQUIREMENTS FOR APPLIANCES
(a) Any appliance regulated by the Appliance Efficiency Regulations, Title 20 California Code of Regulations,
Section 1601 et seq., may be installed only if the appliance fully complies with Section 1608(a) of those
(b) Except for those circumstances described in Section 110.1(c), conformance with efficiency levels required to
comply with Part 6 mandatory, prescriptive and performance standards shall be verified utilizing data from
1. The Energy Commission's database of certified appliances maintained pursuant to Title 20 California Code
of Regulations, Section 1606, and which is available at: www.energy.ca.gov/appliances/database/; or
2. An equivalent directory published by a federal agency; or
3. An approved trade association directory as defined in Title 20 California Code of Regulations, Section
(c) Conformance with efficiency levels required to comply with Part 6 mandatory, prescriptive and performance
standards shall be demonstrated either by default to the mandatory efficiency levels specified in Part 6 or by
following procedures approved by the Commission pursuant to Section 10-109 of Title 24, Part 1, when:
1. Data to verify conformance with efficiency levels required to comply with Part 6 mandatory, prescriptive
and performance standards is not available pursuant to subdivision (b); or
2. Field verification and diagnostic testing is required for compliance with Part 6 and the Energy Commission
has not approved a field verification and diagnostic test protocol that is applicable to the appliance; or
3. The appliance meets the requirements of Section 110.1(a) but has been site-modified in a way that affects
4. The U.S. Department of Energy has approved a waiver from federal test procedures, pursuant to 10 CFR
Section 430.27 or Section 431.401 and that waiver fails to specify how the efficiency of the system shall be
SECTION 110.1 – MANDATORY REQUIREMENTS FOR APPLIANCES
2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards Page 95
SECTION 110.2 – MANDATORY REQUIREMENTS FOR SPACE-
Certification by Manufacturers. Any space-conditioning equipment listed in this section may be installed only if
the manufacturer has certified to the Commission that the equipment complies with all the applicable requirements of
(a) Efficiency. Equipment shall meet the applicable efficiency requirements in TABLE 110.2-A through TABLE
1. If more than one efficiency standard is listed for any equipment in TABLE 110.2-A through TABLE 110.2-
K, the equipment shall meet all the applicable standards that are listed; and
2. If more than one test method is listed in TABLE 110.2-A through TABLE 110.2-K, the equipment shall
comply with the applicable efficiency standard when tested with each listed test method; and
3. Where equipment serves more than one function, it shall comply with the efficiency standards applicable to
4. Where a requirement is for equipment rated at its "maximum rated capacity" or "minimum rated capacity,"
the capacity shall be as provided for and allowed by the controls, during steady-state operation.
EXCEPTION 1 to Section 110.2(a): Water-cooled centrifugal water-chilling packages that are not designed for
operation at ANSI/AHRI Standard 550/590 test conditions of 44°F leaving chilled water temperature and 85°F
entering condenser water temperature with 3 gallons per minute per ton condenser water flow shall have a
maximum full load kW/ton and NPLV ratings adjusted using the following equation:
Adjusted maximum full-load kW/ton rating = (full-load kW/ton from TABLE 110.2-D) / Kadj
Adjusted maximum NPLV rating = (IPLV from TABLE 110.2-D) / Kadj
LvgCond = Full-load leaving condenser fluid temperature (°F)
LvgEvap = Full-load leaving evaporator fluid temperature (°F)
The adjusted full-load and NPLV values are only applicable for centrifugal chillers meeting all of the following
• Minimum Leaving Evaporator Fluid Temperature: 36°F
• Maximum Leaving Condenser Fluid Temperature: 115°F
Centrifugal chillers designed to operate outside of these ranges are not covered by this exception.
EXCEPTION 2 to Section 110.2(a): Positive displacement (air-cooled and water-cooled) chillers with a
leaving evaporator fluid temperature higher than 32°F shall show compliance with TABLE 110.2-D when tested
or certified with water at standard rating conditions, per the referenced test procedure.
EXCEPTION 3 to Section 110.2(a): Equipment primarily serving refrigerated warehouses or commercial
(b) Controls for Heat Pumps with Supplementary Electric Resistance Heaters. Heat pumps with supplementary
electric resistance heaters shall have controls:
SECTION 110.2 – MANDATORY REQUIREMENTS FOR SPACE-CONDITIONING EQUIPMENT
Page 96 2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards
1. That prevent supplementary heater operation when the heating load can be met by the heat pump alone; and
2. In which the cut-on temperature for compression heating is higher than the cut-on temperature for
supplementary heating, and the cut-off temperature for compression heating is higher than the cut-off
EXCEPTION 1 to Section 110.2(b): The controls may allow supplementary heater operation during:
B. Transient periods such as start-ups and following room thermostat setpoint advance, if the controls
provide preferential rate control, intelligent recovery, staging, ramping or another control mechanism
designed to preclude the unnecessary operation of supplementary heating.
EXCEPTION 2 to Section 110.2(b): Room air-conditioner heat pumps.
(c) Thermostats. All heating or cooling systems not controlled by a central energy management control system
1. Setback Capabilities. All thermostats shall have a clock mechanism that allows the building occupant to
program the temperature setpoints for at least four periods within 24 hours. Thermostats for heat pumps
shall meet the requirements of Section 110.2(b).
EXCEPTION to Section 110.2(c): Gravity gas wall heaters, gravity floor heaters, gravity room heaters, non-
central electric heaters, fireplaces or decorative gas appliances, wood stoves, room air conditioners, and room
(d) Gas-Fired and Oil-Fired Furnace Standby Loss Controls. Gas-fired and oil-fired forced air furnaces with
input ratings ≥225,000 Btu/hr shall also have an intermittent ignition or interrupted device (IID), and have either
power venting or a flue damper. A vent damper is an acceptable alternative to a flue damper for furnaces where
combustion air is drawn from the conditioned space. All furnaces with input ratings ≥225,000 Btu/h, including
electric furnaces, that are not located within the conditioned space shall have jacket losses not exceeding 0.75
(e) Open and Closed Circuit Cooling Towers. All open and closed circuit cooling tower installations shall
1. Be equipped with Conductivity or Flow-based Controls that maximize cycles of concentration based on
local water quality conditions. Controls shall automate system bleed and chemical feed based on
conductivity, or in proportion to metered makeup volume, metered bleed volume, recirculating pump run
time, or bleed time. Conductivity controllers shall be installed in accordance with manufacturer’s
2. Documentation of Maximum Achievable Cycles of Concentration. Building owners shall document the
maximum cycles of concentration based on local water supply as reported annually by the local water
supplier, and using the calculator approved by the Energy Commission. The calculator is intended to
determine maximum cycles based on a Langelier Saturation Index (LSI) of 2.5 or less. Building owner shall
document maximum cycles of concentration on the mechanical compliance form which shall be reviewed
and signed by the Professional Engineer (P.E.) of Record.
3. Be equipped with a Flow Meter with an analog output for flow either hardwired or available through a
gateway on the makeup water line.
4. Be equipped with an Overflow Alarm to prevent overflow of the sump in case of makeup water valve
failure. Overflow alarm shall send an audible signal or provide an alert via the Energy Management Control
System to the tower operator in case of sump overflow.
5. Be equipped with Efficient Drift Eliminators that achieve drift reduction to 0.002 percent of the circulated
water volume for counter-flow towers and 0.005 percent for cross-flow towers.
EXCEPTION to Section 110.2(e): Towers with rated capacity < 150 tons.
(f) Low Leakage Air-Handling Units. To qualify as a low leakage air-handling unit for use for meeting the
requirements for applicable low leakage air-handling unit compliance credit(s) available in the performance
SECTION 110.2 – MANDATORY REQUIREMENTS FOR SPACE-CONDITIONING EQUIPMENT
2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards Page 97
standards set forth in Sections 150.1(b) and 140.1, the manufacturer shall certify to the Energy Commission that
the air-handling unit meets the specifications in Reference Joint Appendix JA9.
TABLE 110.2-A AIR CONDITIONERS AND CONDENSING UNITS – MINIMUM EFFICIENCY REQUIREMENTS
Equipment Type Size Category Test Procedurec
a IEERs are only applicable to equipment with capacity control as as specified by ANSI/AHRI 340/360 test
b Deduct 0.2 from the required EERs and IEERs for units with a heating section other than electric
c Applicable test procedure and reference year are provided under the definitions.
SECTION 110.2 – MANDATORY REQUIREMENTS FOR SPACE-CONDITIONING EQUIPMENT
Page 98 2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards
TABLE 110.2-B HEAT PUMPS, MINIMUM EFFICIENCY REQUIREMENTS
Equipment Type Size Category Test Procedurec
split system and single
Water source (cooling 86ºF entering water 13.0 EER
SECTION 110.2 – MANDATORY REQUIREMENTS FOR SPACE-CONDITIONING EQUIPMENT
2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards Page 99
CONTINUED: TABLE 110.2-B HEAT PUMPS, MINIMUM EFFICIENCY REQUIREMENTS
Equipment Type Size Category Efficiency a Test Procedurec
a IEERs are only applicable to equipment with capacity control as as specified by ANSI/AHRI 340/360 test procedures.
b Deduct 0.2 from the required EERs and IEERs for units with a heating section other than electric resistance heat.
c Applicable test procedure and reference year are provided under the definitions.
TABLE 110.2-C AIR-COOLED GAS-ENGINE HEAT PUMPS
Equipment Type Size Category Efficiency Test Procedurea
a Applicable test procedure and reference year are provided under the definitions.
SECTION 110.2 – MANDATORY REQUIREMENTS FOR SPACE-CONDITIONING EQUIPMENT
Page 100 2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards
TABLE 110.2-D WATER CHILLING PACKAGES – MINIMUM EFFICIENCY REQUIREMENTS a,b
Equipment Type Size Category Path A Efficiency a,b Path B Efficiency a,b Test Procedure c
Air Cooled, Air-cooled chillers without condensers must be
Without Condenser All Capacities rated with matching condensers and comply with
Electrically Operated the air-cooled chiller efficiency requirements.
Water Cooled, Reciprocating units must comply with the water-
Electrically Operated, All Capacities cooled positive displacement efficiency AHRI 550/590
SECTION 110.2 – MANDATORY REQUIREMENTS FOR SPACE-CONDITIONING EQUIPMENT
2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards Page 101
CONTINUED: TABLE 110.2-D WATER CHILLING PACKAGES – MINIMUM
Equipment Type Size Category Path A Efficiency a,b a,b Test Procedure c
Absorption, Single All Capacities ≥ 0.700 COP N.A. d
Water Cooled Gas ≥ 1.2 COP
Engine Driven Chiller ≥ 2.0 IPLV
• Centrifugal chillers with design leaving evaporator temperature < 36°F; or
• Positive displacement chillers with design leaving fluid temperature ≤ 32°F; or
• Absorption chillers with design leaving fluid temperature < 40°F.
b Must meet the minimum requirements of Path A or Path B. However, both the full load (COP) and IPLV must be met to
fulfill the requirements of the applicable Path.
SECTION 110.2 – MANDATORY REQUIREMENTS FOR SPACE-CONDITIONING EQUIPMENT
Page 102 2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards
TABLE 110.2-E PACKAGED TERMINAL AIR CONDITIONERS AND PACKAGED TERMINAL HEAT PUMPS –
Equipment Type Size Category (Input) Efficiency Test Procedure c
Replacements b All Capacities 95°F db Outdoor Air Cap/1000) a EER
Replacements b All Capacities 95°F db Outdoor Air Cap/1000) a EER
Replacements b All Capacities - Cap/1000) a COP
nonweatherized space Outdoor Air
a Cap means the rated cooling capacity of the product in Btu/h. If the unit’s capacity is less than 7000 Btu/h, use 7000 Btu/h in the calculation. If the unit’s
capacity is greater than 15,000 Btu/h, use 15,000 Btu/h in the calculation.
b Replacement units must be factory labeled as follows: "MANUFACTURED FOR REPLACEMENT APPLICATIONS ONLY; NOT TO BE INSTALLED IN
NEWLY CONSTRUCTED BUILDINGS." Replacement efficiencies apply only to units with existing sleeves less than 16 inches high or less than 42 inch wide
and having a cross-sectional area less than 670 square inches.
c Applicable test procedure and reference year are provided under the definitions.
SECTION 110.2 – MANDATORY REQUIREMENTS FOR SPACE-CONDITIONING EQUIPMENT
2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards Page 103
TABLE 110.2-F HEAT TRANSFER EQUIPMENT
Equipment Type Subcategory Minimum Efficiencya Test Procedure b
Liquid-to-liquid heat exchangers Plate type NR ANSI/AHRI 400
b Applicable test procedure and reference year are provided under the definitions.
SECTION 110.2 – MANDATORY REQUIREMENTS FOR SPACE-CONDITIONING EQUIPMENT
Page 104 2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards
TABLE 110.2-G PERFORMANCE REQUIREMENTS FOR HEAT REJECTION EQUIPMENT
Equipment Type Total C S a y p st a e c m ity H a e t a R t a R t e e j d e ction Subcategory or Rating Performance Test Procedure e
Open-circuit cooling towers CTI STD-201
Propeller or axial fan 75 F entering air wb
evaporative condensers Ammonia test fluid
Centrifugal fan 75 F entering air wb
evaporative condensers Ammonia test fluid
Air cooled condensers All 190°F entering gas temperature ≥ 176,000 Btu/h·hp ANSI/AHRI 460
a For purposes of this table, open-circuit cooling tower performance is defined as the water flow rating of the tower at the given rated
conditions divided by the fan motor nameplate power.
b For purposes of this table, closed-circuit cooling tower performance is defined as the process water flow rating of the tower at the
given rated conditions divided by the sum of the fan motor nameplate rated power and the integral spray pump motor nameplate
c For purposes of this table air-cooled condenser performance is defined as the heat rejected from the refrigerant divided by the fan
d Open cooling towers shall be tested using the test procedures in CTI ATC-105. Performance of factory assembled open cooling
towers shall be either certified as base models as specified in CTI STD-201 or verified by testing in the field by a CTI approved
testing agency. Open factory assembled cooling towers with custom options added to a CTI certified base model for the purpose of
safe maintenance or to reduce environmental or noise impact shall be rated at 90 percent of the CTI certified performance of the
associated base model or at the manufacturer’s stated performance, whichever is less. Base models of open factory assembled
cooling towers are open cooling towers configured in exact accordance with the Data of Record submitted to CTI as specified by
CTI STD-201. There are no certification requirements for field erected cooling towers.
e Applicable test procedure and reference year are provided under the definitions.
For refrigerated warehouses or commercial refrigeration applications, condensers shall comply with requirements specified by
SECTION 110.2 – MANDATORY REQUIREMENTS FOR SPACE-CONDITIONING EQUIPMENT
2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards Page 105
TABLE 110.2-H Electrically Operated Variable Refrigerant Flow (VRF) Air Conditioners
Equipment Type Size Category Section or Rating Minimum Efficiency Test
Air Cooled ≥135,000 Btu/h and Electric VRF Multi-split 1230
a Applicable test procedure and reference year are provided under the definitions.
b IEERs are only applicable to equipment with capacity control as specified by ANSI/AHRI 1230 test procedures.
SECTION 110.2 – MANDATORY REQUIREMENTS FOR SPACE-CONDITIONING EQUIPMENT
Page 106 2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards
TABLE 110.2-I Electrically Operated Variable Refrigerant Flow Air-to-Air and Applied Heat Pumps - Minimum
Heating Section Sub-Category or Rating Minimum
Equipment Type Size Category Type Condition Efficiency Test Procedure b
Resistance (or VRF Multi-split System a
Resistance (or VRF Multi-split System a
Resistance (or VRF Multi-split System a
VRF Groundwater 59ºF entering water
VRF Ground 77ºF entering water
SECTION 110.2 – MANDATORY REQUIREMENTS FOR SPACE-CONDITIONING EQUIPMENT
2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards Page 107
CONTINUED: TABLE 110.2-I Electrically Operated Variable Refrigerant Flow Air-to-Air and Applied Heat Pumps
Equipment Type Size Category Section Sub-Category or Rating Minimum Test
Type Condition Efficiency Procedure b
VRF Multi-split system 2.25 COP
VRF Multi-split system 2.05 COP
VRF Groundwater (cooling capacity) 50ºF entering water
a Deduct 0.2 from the required EERs and IEERs for Variable Refrigerant Flow (VRF) Multi-split system units with a heating recovery
b Applicable test procedure and reference year are provided under the definitions.
SECTION 110.2 – MANDATORY REQUIREMENTS FOR SPACE-CONDITIONING EQUIPMENT
Page 108 2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards
c IEERs are only applicable to equipment with capacity control as specified by ANSI/AHRI 1230 test procedures.
SECTION 110.2 – MANDATORY REQUIREMENTS FOR SPACE-CONDITIONING EQUIPMENT
2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards Page 109
TABLE 110.2-J Warm-Air Furnaces and Combination Warm-Air Furnaces/Air-Conditioning Units, Warm-Air Duct
Size Category Subcategory or Minimum
Equipment Type Test Procedurea
Warm-Air Furnace, Section 2.39, Thermal Efficiency, ANSI
All Capacities Maximum Capacityb 80% Ec Section 2.10, Efficiency, ANSI Z83.8
All Capacities Maximum Capacityb 80% Ec Section 2.10, Efficiency, ANSI Z83.8
All Capacities Maximum Capacityb 81% Ec Section 40, Combustion, UL 731
a Applicable test procedure and reference year are provided under the definitions.
b Compliance of multiple firing rate units shall be at maximum firing rate.
c Combustion units not covered by the U.S. Department of Energy Code of Federal Regulations 10 CFR 430 (3-phase
power or cooling capacity greater than or equal to 19 kW) may comply with either rating.
d Et= thermal efficiency. Units must also include an interrupted or intermittent ignition device (IID), have jacket losses not
exceeding 0.75% of the input rating, and have either power venting or a flue damper. A vent damper is an acceptable
alternative to a flue damper for those furnaces where combustion air is drawn from the conditioned space.
e Ec= combustion efficiency (100% less flue losses). See test procedure for detailed discussion.
f As of August 8, 2008, according to the Energy Policy Act of 2005, units must also include interrupted or intermittent
ignition device (IID) and have either power venting or an automatic flue damper.
SECTION 110.2 – MANDATORY REQUIREMENTS FOR SPACE-CONDITIONING EQUIPMENT
Page 110 2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards
TABLE 110.2-K Gas- and Oil-Fired Boilers, Minimum Efficiency requirements
Equipment Sub Category Size Category (Input) Efficiency b,c Test Procedure a
a Applicable test procedure and reference year are provided under the definitions.
b Ec = combustion efficiency (100% less flue losses).See reference document for detailed information.
c Et= thermal efficiency. See test procedure for detailed information.
d Maximum capacity - minimum and maximum ratings as provided for and allowed by the unit’s controls.
SECTION 110.2 – MANDATORY REQUIREMENTS FOR SPACE-CONDITIONING EQUIPMENT
2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards Page 111
SECTION 110.3 – MANDATORY REQUIREMENTS FOR SERVICE
WATER-HEATING SYSTEMS AND EQUIPMENT
(a) Certification by Manufacturers. Any service water-heating system or equipment may be installed only if the
manufacturer has certified that the system or equipment complies with all of the requirements of this subsection
1. Temperature controls for service water heating systems. Service water-heating systems shall be equipped
with automatic temperature controls capable of adjustment from the lowest to the highest acceptable
temperature settings for the intended use as listed in Table 3, Chapter 50 of the ASHRAE Handbook,
HVAC Applications Volume or Table 613.1 of the California Plumbing Code for healthcare facilities.
(b) Efficiency. Equipment shall meet the applicable requirements of the Appliance Efficiency Regulations as
required by Section 110.1, subject to the following:
1. If more than one standard is listed in the Appliance Efficiency Regulations, the equipment shall meet all the
2. If more than one test method is listed in the Appliance Efficiency Regulations, the equipment shall comply
with the applicable standard when tested with each test method; and
3. Where equipment can serve more than one function, such as both heating and cooling, or both space heating
and water heating, it shall comply with all the requirements applicable to each function; and
4. Where a requirement is for equipment rated at its "maximum rated capacity" or "minimum rated capacity,"
the capacity shall be as provided for and allowed by the controls, during steady-state operation.
(c) Installation. Any service water-heating system or equipment may be installed only if the system or equipment
complies with all of the applicable requirements of this subsection for the system or equipment.
1. Outlet temperature controls. On systems that have a total capacity greater than 167,000 Btu/hr, outlets
that require higher than service water temperatures as listed in the ASHRAE Handbook, Applications
Volume, shall have separate remote heaters, heat exchangers, or boosters to supply the outlet with the
EXCEPTION to section 110.3(c)1: Systems covered by California Plumbing Code Section 613.0 shall
instead follow the requirements of that section.
2. Controls for hot water distribution systems. Service hot water systems with circulating pumps or with
electrical heat trace systems shall be capable of automatically turning off the system.
EXCEPTION to Section 110.3(c)2: Systems serving healthcare facilities.
3. Insulation. Unfired service water heater storage tanks and backup tanks for solar water-heating systems
A. External insulation with an installed R-value of at least R-12; or
B. Internal and external insulation with a combined R-value of at least R-16; or
C. The heat loss of the tank surface based on an 80°F water-air temperature difference shall be less than
6.5 Btu per hour per square foot.
4. Water Heating Recirculation Loops Serving Multiple Dwelling Units, High-Rise Residential,
Hotel/Motel, and Nonresidential Occupancies. A water heating recirculation loop is a type of hot water
distribution system that reduces the time needed to deliver hot water to fixtures that are distant from the
water heater, boiler or other water heating equipment. The recirculation loop is comprised of a supply
portion, connected to branches that serve multiple dwelling units, guest rooms, or fixtures and a return
portion that completes the loop back to the water heating equipment. A water heating recirculation loop
shall meet the following requirements:
A. Air release valve or vertical pump installation. An automatic air release valve shall be installed on
the recirculation loop piping on the inlet side of the recirculation pump and no more than 4 feet from
SECTION 110.3 – MANDATORY REQUIREMENTS FOR SERVICE WATER-HEATING SYSTEMS AND
Page 112 2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards
the pump. This valve shall be mounted on top of a vertical riser at least 12” in length and shall be
accessible for replacement and repair. Alternatively, the pump shall be installed on a vertical section of
B. Recirculation loop backflow prevention. A check valve or similar device shall be located between the
recirculation pump and the water heating equipment to prevent water from flowing backwards though
C. Equipment for pump priming. A hose bibb shall be installed between the pump and the water heating
equipment. An isolation valve shall be installed between the hose bibb and the water heating
equipment. This hose bibb is used for bleeding air out of the pump after pump replacement.
D. Pump isolation valves. Isolation valves shall be installed on both sides of the pump. These valves may
be part of the flange that attaches the pump to the pipe. One of the isolation valves may be the same
E. Cold water supply and recirculation loop connection to hot water storage tank. Storage water
heaters and boilers shall be plumbed in accordance with the manufacturer’s specifications. The cold
water piping and the recirculation loop piping shall not be connected to the hot water storage tank drain
F. Cold water supply backflow prevention. A check valve shall be installed on the cold water supply
line between the hot water system and the next closest tee on the cold water supply line. The system
shall comply with the expansion tank requirements as described in the California Plumbing Code
5. Service water heaters in state buildings. Any newly constructed building constructed by the State shall
derive its service water heating from a system that provides at least 60 percent of the energy needed for
service water heating from site solar energy or recovered energy, per the statutory requirement of California
Public Resources Code Section 25498.
EXCEPTION to Section 110.3(c)5: Buildings for which the state architect determines that service water
heating from site solar energy or recovered energy is economically or physically infeasible.
6. Isolation valves. Instantaneous water heaters with an input rating greater than 6.8 kBTU/hr (2 kW) shall
have isolation valves on both the cold water supply and the hot water pipe leaving the water heater, and
hose bibbs or other fittings on each valve for flushing the water heater when the valves are closed.
SECTION 110.3 – MANDATORY REQUIREMENTS FOR SERVICE WATER-HEATING SYSTEMS AND
2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards Page 113
SECTION 110.4 – MANDATORY REQUIREMENTS FOR POOL AND SPA
(a) Certification by Manufacturers. Any pool or spa heating system or equipment may be installed only if the
manufacturer has certified that the system or equipment has all of the following:
1. Efficiency. A thermal efficiency that complies with the Appliance Efficiency Regulations; and
2. On-off switch. A readily accessible on-off switch, mounted on the outside of the heater that allows shutting
off the heater without adjusting the thermostat setting; and
3. Instructions. A permanent, easily readable, and weatherproof plate or card that gives instruction for the
energy efficient operation of the pool or spa heater and for the proper care of pool or spa water when a
4. Electric resistance heating. No electric resistance heating.
EXCEPTION 1 to Section 110.4(a)4: Listed package units with fully insulated enclosures, and with tight-
fitting covers that are insulated to at least R-6.
EXCEPTION 2 to Section 110.4(a)4: Pools or spas deriving at least 60 percent of the annual heating
energy from site solar energy or recovered energy.
(b) Installation. Any pool or spa system or equipment shall be installed with all of the following:
1. Piping. At least 36 inches of pipe shall be installed between the filter and the heater or dedicated suction
and return lines, or built-in or built-up connections shall be installed to allow for the future addition of solar
2. Covers. A cover for outdoor pools or outdoor spas that have a heat pump or gas heater; and
3. Directional inlets and time switches for pools. If the system or equipment is for a pool:
i. The pool shall have directional inlets that adequately mix the pool water; and
ii. A time switch or similar control mechanism shall be installed as part of a pool water circulation control
system that will allow all pumps to be set or programmed to run only during the off-peak electric
demand period and for the minimum time necessary to maintain the water in the condition required by
SECTION 110.4 – MANDATORY REQUIREMENTS FOR POOL AND SPA SYSTEMS AND EQUIPMENT
2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards Page 115
SECTION 110.5 – NATURAL GAS CENTRAL FURNACES, COOKING
EQUIPMENT, POOL AND SPA HEATERS, AND FIREPLACES: PILOT
Any natural gas system or equipment listed below may be installed only if it does not have a continuously burning
EXCEPTION to Section 110.5(b): Household cooking appliances without an electrical supply voltage
connection and in which each pilot consumes less than 150 Btu/hr.
SECTION 110.5 – NATURAL GAS CENTRAL FURNACES, COOKING EQUIPMENT, POOL AND SPA HEATERS,
AND FIREPLACES: PILOT LIGHTS PROHIBITED
Page 116 2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards
SECTION 110.6 – MANDATORY REQUIREMENTS FOR
FENESTRATION PRODUCTS AND EXTERIOR DOORS
(a) Certification of Fenestration Products and Exterior Doors other than Field-fabricated. Any fenestration
product and exterior door, other than field-fabricated fenestration products and field-fabricated exterior doors,
may be installed only if the manufacturer has certified to the Commission, or if an independent certifying
organization approved by the Commission has certified that the product complies with all of the applicable
1. Air leakage. Manufactured fenestration products and exterior doors shall have air infiltration rates not
exceeding 0.3 cfm/ft² of window area, 0.3 cfm/ft² of door area for residential doors, 0.3 cfm/ft² of door area
for nonresidential single doors (swinging and sliding), and 1.0 cfm/ft² for nonresidential double doors
(swinging), when tested according to NFRC-400 or ASTM E283 at a pressure differential of 75 pascals (or
NOTES TO SECTION 110.6(a)1:Pet doors must meet 0.3 cfm/ft² when tested according to ASTM E283
ASTM E283 at a pressure differential of 75 pascals (or 1.57 pounds/ft²) and satisfies the air leakage
EXCEPTION to Section 110.6(a)1: Field-fabricated fenestration and field-fabricated exterior doors.
2. U-factor. The fenestration product and exterior door’s U-factor shall be rated in accordance with NFRC
100, or use the applicable default U-factor set forth in TABLE 110.6-A.
EXCEPTION 1 to Section 110.6(a)2: If the fenestration product is a skylight or a vertical site-built
fenestration product in a building covered by the nonresidential standards with less than 200 square feet of
site-built fenestration, the default U-factor may be calculated as set forth in Reference Nonresidential
EXCEPTION 2 to Section 110.6(a)2: If the fenestration product is an alteration consisting of any area
replacement of glass in a skylight product or in a vertical site-built fenestration product, in a building
covered by the nonresidential standards, the default U-factor may be calculated as set forth in Reference
3. Solar Heat Gain Coefficient (SHGC). The fenestration product’s SHGC shall be rated in accordance with
NFRC 200, or use the applicable default SHGC set forth in TABLE 110.6-B.
EXCEPTION 1 to Section 110.6(a)3: If the fenestration product is a skylight or a vertical site-built
fenestration product in a building covered by the nonresidential standards with less than 200 square feet of
site-built fenestration, the default SHGC may be calculated as set forth in Reference Nonresidential
EXCEPTION 2 to Section 110.6(a)3: If the fenestration product is an alteration consisting of any area
replacement of glass in a skylight product or in a vertical site-built fenestration product, in a building
covered by the nonresidential standards, the default SHGC may be calculated as set forth in Reference
4. Visible Transmittance (VT). The fenestration product’s VT shall be rated in accordance with NFRC 200
or ASTM E972, for tubular daylighting devices VT shall be rated using NFRC 203.
EXCEPTION 1 to Section 110.6(a)4: If the fenestration product is a skylight or a vertical site-built
fenestration product in a building covered by the nonresidential standards with less than 200 square feet of
site-built fenestration, the default VT may be calculated as set forth in Reference Nonresidential Appendix
EXCEPTION 2 to Section 110.6(a)4: If the fenestration product is an alteration consisting of any area;
replacement of glass in a skylight product or in a vertical site-built fenestration product in a building
covered by the nonresidential standards, the default VT may be calculated as set forth in Reference
5. Labeling. Fenestration products and exterior doors shall:
SECTION 110.6 – MANDATORY REQUIREMENTS FOR FENESTRATION PRODUCTS AND EXTERIOR DOORS
2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards Page 117
A. Have a temporary label for manufactured fenestration products and exterior doors or a label certificate
when the Component Modeling Approach (CMA) is used and for site-built fenestration meeting the
requirements of Section 10-111(a)1. The temporary label shall not be removed before inspection by the
B. Have a permanent label or a label certificate when the Component Modeling Approach (CMA) is used
and for site-built fenestration meeting the requirements of Section 10-111(a)2 if the product is rated
6. Fenestration Acceptance Requirements. Before an occupancy permit is granted, site-built fenestration
products in other than low-rise residential buildings shall be certified as meeting the Acceptance
Requirements for Code Compliance, as specified in the Reference Nonresidential Appendix NA7 to ensure
that site-built fenestration meets Standards requirements, including a matching label certificate for
product(s) installed and be readily accessible at the project location. A Certificate of Acceptance certifying
that the fenestration product meets the acceptance requirements shall be completed, signed and submitted to
EXCEPTION to Section 110.6(a): Fenestration products removed and reinstalled as part of a building
(b) Installation of Field-fabricated Fenestration and Exterior Doors. Field-fabricated fenestration and field-
fabricated exterior doors may be installed only if the compliance documentation has demonstrated compliance
for the installation using U-factors from Table 110.6-A and SHGC values from Table 110.6-B. Field-fabricated
fenestration and field-fabricated exterior doors shall be caulked between the fenestration products or exterior
door and the building, and shall be weatherstripped.
EXCEPTION to Section 110.6(b): Unframed glass doors and fire doors need not be weatherstripped or
SECTION 110.6 – MANDATORY REQUIREMENTS FOR FENESTRATION PRODUCTS AND EXTERIOR DOORS
Page 118 2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards
TABLE 110.6-A DEFAULT FENESTRATION PRODUCT U-FACTORS
1.For all dual-glazed fenestration products, adjust the listed U-factors as follows:
a.Add 0.05 for products with dividers between panes if spacer is less than 7/16 inch wide.
b.Add 0.05 to any product with true divided lite (dividers through the panes).
2. Translucent or transparent panels shall use glass block values when not rated by NFRC 100.
3.Visible Transmittance (VT) shall be calculated by using Reference Nonresidential Appendix NA6.
4. Windows with window film applied that is not rated by NFRC 100 shall use the default values from this
SECTION 110.6 – MANDATORY REQUIREMENTS FOR FENESTRATION PRODUCTS AND EXTERIOR DOORS
2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards Page 119
TABLE 110.6-B DEFAULT SOLAR HEAT GAIN COEFFICIENT (SHGC)
FRAME TYPE PRODUCT GLAZING
1 Translucent or transparent panels shall use glass block values when not rated by NFRC 200.
2.Visible Transmittance (VT) shall be calculated by using Reference Nonresidential Appendix NA6.
3.Windows with window film applied that is not rated by NFRC 200 shall use the default values from this
SECTION 110.6 – MANDATORY REQUIREMENTS FOR FENESTRATION PRODUCTS AND EXTERIOR DOORS
Page 120 2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards
SECTION 110.7 – MANDATORY REQUIREMENTS TO LIMIT AIR
All joints, penetrations and other openings in the building envelope that are potential sources of air leakage shall be
caulked, gasketed, weather stripped, or otherwise sealed to limit infiltration and exfiltration.
SECTION 110.7 – MANDATORY REQUIREMENTS TO LIMIT AIR LEAKAGE
2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards Page 121
SECTION 110.8 – MANDATORY REQUIREMENTS FOR INSULATION,
ROOFING PRODUCTS AND RADIANT BARRIERS
(a) Insulation Certification by Manufacturers. All insulation shall be certified by Department of Consumer
Affairs, Bureau of Electronic and Appliance Repair, Home Furnishings and Thermal Insulation that the
insulation conductive thermal performance is approved pursuant to the California Code of Regulations, Title 24,
Part 12, Chapters 12-13, Article 3, “Standards for Insulating Material.”
(b) Installation of Urea Formaldehyde Foam Insulation. Urea formaldehyde foam insulation may be applied or
1. It is installed in exterior side walls; and
2. A four-mil-thick plastic polyethylene vapor retarder or equivalent plastic sheathing vapor retarder is
installed between the urea formaldehyde foam insulation and the interior space in all applications.
(c) Flame Spread Rating of Insulation. All insulating material shall be installed in compliance with the flame
spread rating and smoke density requirements of the CBC.
(d) Installation of Insulation in Existing Buildings. Insulation installed in an existing attic, or on an existing duct
or water heater, shall comply with the applicable requirements of Subsections 1, 2, and 3 below. If a contractor
installs the insulation, the contractor shall certify to the customer, in writing, that the insulation meets the
applicable requirements of Subsections 1, 2, and 3 below.
1. Attics. If insulation is installed in the existing attic of a low-rise residential building, the R-value of the total
amount of insulation (after addition of insulation to the amount, if any, already in the attic) shall meet the
EXCEPTION to Section 110.8(d)1: Where the accessible space in the attic is not large enough to
accommodate the required R-value, the entire accessible space shall be filled with insulation provided such
installation does not violate Section 1203.2 of Title 24, Part 2.
2. Water heaters. If external insulation is installed on an existing unfired water storage tank or on an existing
back-up tank for a solar water-heating system, it shall have an R-value of at least R-12, or the heat loss of
the tank surface based on an 80°F water-air temperature difference shall be less than 6.5 Btu per hour per
3. Ducts. If insulation is installed on an existing space-conditioning duct, it shall comply with Section 604.0 of
(g) Insulation Requirements for Heated Slab Floors. Heated slab floors shall be insulated according to the
1. Insulation materials in ground contact must:
A. Comply with the certification requirements of Section 110.8(a); and
B. Have a water absorption rate for the insulation material alone without facings that are no greater than
0.3percent when tested in accordance with Test Method A – 24 Hour-Immersion of ASTM C272.
C. Water vapor permeance no greater than 2.0 perm/inch when tested in accordance with ASTM E96.
A. Be covered with a solid guard that protects against damage from ultraviolet radiation, moisture,
landscaping operation, equipment maintenance, and wind; and
B. Include a rigid plate, which penetrates the slab and blocks the insulation from acting as a conduit for
insects from the ground to the structure above the foundation.
SECTION 110.8 – MANDATORY REQUIREMENTS FOR INSULATION, ROOFING PRODUCTS AND RADIANT
Page 122 2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards
TABLE 110.8-A SLAB INSULATION REQUIREMENTS FOR HEATED SLAB FLOOR
Insulation Location Insulation Installation Requirements Climate Insulation
From the level of the top of the slab, down 16 inches
or to the frost line, whichever is greater. Insulation
may stop at the top of the footing where this is less
Vertical than the required depth. For below grade slabs, vertical
insulation shall be extended from the top of the
foundation wall foundation wall to the bottom of the foundation (or the 16 10
top of the footing) or to the frost line, whichever is
Vertical insulation from top of slab at inside edge of 1 – 15 5
Between heated slab outside wall down to the top of the horizontal
center of the slab in a direction normal to the outside
(h) Wet Insulation Systems. When insulation is installed on roofs above the roofing membrane or layer used to
seal the roof from water penetration, the effective R-value of the insulation shall be as specified in Reference
(i) Roofing Products Solar Reflectance and Thermal Emittance.
or 150.2(b)2, a roofing product’s thermal emittance and an aged solar reflectance shall be certified and
labeled according to the requirements of Section 10-113.
EXCEPTION 1 to Section 110.8(i)1: Roofing products that are not certified according to Section 10-113
shall assume the following default aged solar reflectance/thermal emittance values:
B. For all other roofing products: 0.10/0.75
2. If CRRC testing for an aged solar reflectance is not available for any roofing products, the aged value shall
be derived from the CRRC initial value using the equation ρ =[0.2+β[ρ -0.2], where ρ = the initial
solar reflectance and soiling resistance β is listed by product type in TABLE 110.8-B.
TABLE 110.8-B VALUES OF SOILING RESISTANCE β BY PRODUCT TYPE
Product Type CRRC Product Category β
Field-Applied Coating Field-Applied Coating 0.65
Other Not A Field-Applied Coating 0.70
3. Solar Reflectance Index (SRI), calculated as specified by ASTM E 1980-01, may be used as an alternative
to thermal emittance and an aged solar reflectance when complying with the requirements of Sections
moderate wind velocity of 2-6 meters per second. The SRI shall be calculated based on the aged solar
reflectance value of the roofing products.
4. Liquid applied roof coatings applied to low-sloped roofs in the field as the top surface of a roof covering
A. Be applied across the entire roof surface to meet the dry mil thickness or coverage recommended by the
coating manufacturer, taking into consideration the substrate on which the coating is applied; and
SECTION 110.8 – MANDATORY REQUIREMENTS FOR INSULATION, ROOFING PRODUCTS AND RADIANT
2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards Page 123
B. Meet the minimum performance requirements listed in TABLE 110.8-C or the minimum performance
requirements of ASTM C836, D3468, or D6694, whichever are appropriate to the coating material.
EXCEPTION 1 to Section 110.8(i)4B: Aluminum-pigmented asphalt roof coatings shall meet the
requirements of ASTM D2824 and be installed as specified by ASTM D3805.
EXCEPTION 2 to Section 110.8(i)4B: Cement-based roof coatings shall contain a minimum of 20
percent cement and shall meet the requirements of ASTM C1583, ASTM D822, and ASTM D5870.
TABLE 110.8-C MINIMUM PERFORMANCE REQUIREMENTS FOR LIQUID APPLIED ROOF COATINGS
Initial Flexibility D522, Test B Minimum pass 1” mandrel @ 0° F (-18° C)
Initial Flexibility D522, Test B Minimum pass 1” mandrel @ 0° F (-18° C)
Final percent elongation (break) after accelerated D2370
Final percent elongation (break) after accelerated D2370
Flexibility after accelerated weathering 1000 h
1.Any cracking or checking visible to the eye fails the test procedure.
(j)Radiant Barrier. A radiant barrier shall have an emittance of 0.05 or less, tested in accordance with ASTM
C1371 or ASTM E408, and shall be certified to the Department of Consumer Affairs as required by Title 24, Part12,
Chapter 12-13, Standards for Insulating Material.
SECTION 110.8 – MANDATORY REQUIREMENTS FOR INSULATION, ROOFING PRODUCTS AND RADIANT
Page 124 2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards
SECTION 110.9 – MANDATORY REQUIREMENTS FOR LIGHTING
(a) All lighting control devices and systems and all light sources subject to the requirements of Section 110.9 shall
1. Shall be installed only if the lighting control or light source complies with all of the applicable requirements
2. Lighting controls may be individual devices or systems consisting of two or more components.
(b) All Lighting Controls. Lighting controls listed in Section 110.9(b) shall comply with the requirements listed
below; and all components of the system considered together as installed shall meet all applicable requirements
for the application for which they are installed as required in Sections 130.0 through 130.5, Sections 140.6
1. Time-Switch Lighting Controls. All controls that provide time-switch functionality, including all
automatic and astronomical time-switch controls, shall have program backup capabilities that prevent the
loss of the device’s schedule for at least 7 days, and the device’s date and time for at least 72 hours if power
A. Time-Switch Controls installed in nonresidential buildings shall
i. For each connected load, be capable of providing manual override to each connected load and of
resuming normally scheduled operation after a manual override is initiated within 2 hours; and
ii. Provide an automatic holiday shutoff feature that turns off all connected loads for at least 24 hours
and then resumes normally scheduled operation.
i. Have sunrise and sunset prediction accuracy within plus or minus 15 minutes and timekeeping
accuracy within 5 minutes per year;
ii. Be capable of displaying date, current time, sunrise time, sunset time, and switching times for each
iii. Be capable of automatically adjusting for daylight savings time; and
iv. Have the ability to independently offset the on and off for each channel by at least 90 minutes
before and after sunrise or sunset.
C. Multilevel Time-Switch Controls shall include at least two separately programmable steps per zone.
D. Time-Switch Controls installed outdoors shall have setback functions that allow the lighting on each
controlled channel to be switched or dimmed to lower levels. The set back functions shall be capable of
being programmed by the user for at least one specific time of day.
2. Daylighting Controls. Controls that provide automatic daylighting functionality shall:
A. Automatically return to its most recent time delay settings within 60 minutes of the last received input
B. Have a set point control that easily distinguishes settings to within 10 percent of full scale adjustment;
C. Provide a linear response within 5 percent accuracy over the range of illuminance measured by the light
D. Be capable of being calibrated in a manner that the person initiating the calibration is remote from the
sensor during calibration to avoid influencing calibration accuracy, for example by having a light
sensor that is physically separated from where the calibration adjustments are made.
3. Dimmers. Controls that provide dimming functionality shall:
A. Be capable of reducing lighting power consumption by a minimum of 65% when at its lowest setting;
SECTION 110.9 – MANDATORY REQUIREMENTS FOR LIGHTING CONTROLS
2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards Page 125
B. Provide reduced flicker operation, meaning that directly controlled light sources shall be provided
electrical power such that the light output has an amplitude modulation of less than 30 percent for
frequencies less than 200 Hz without causing premature lamp failure;
C. Provide an off setting that produces a zero lumen output; and
D. For wall box dimmers and associated switches designed for use in three way circuits, be capable of
turning lights off, and on to the level set by the dimmer if the lights are off.
4. Occupant Sensing Controls. Occupant sensing controls include occupant sensors, motion sensors, and
vacancy sensors, including those with a Partial-ON or Partial-OFF function. Occupant sensing controls
A. Be capable of automatically turning the controlled lights in the area either off or down no more than 20
minutes after the area has been vacated;
B. For manual-on controls, have a grace period of no less than 15 seconds and no more than 30 seconds to
turn on lighting automatically after the sensor has timed out; and
C. Provide a visible status signal that indicates that the device is operating properly, or that it has failed or
malfunctioned. The visible status signal may have an override that turns off the signal.
EXCEPTION to Section 110.9(b)4: Occupant Sensing Control systems may consist of a combination of
single or multilevel Occupant, Motion, or Vacancy Sensor Controls, provided that components installed to
comply with manual-on requirements shall not be capable of conversion by occupants from manual-on to
5. Part-Night Outdoor Lighting Controls, as defined in Section 100.1, shall meet all of the following
A. Have sunrise and sunset prediction accuracy within +/- 15 minutes, using both light sensing and time
B. Have the ability to reduce or turn off outdoor luminaire power at night as required in Section 130.2(c) ;
C. Shall be programmable to reduce or turn off outdoor luminaire power at any time as determined by the
user. Time-based scheduling control is allowed to be relative to both sunset and sunrise, and to the
midpoint between sunset and sunrise.
6. Sensors used to detect occupants. Sensors that are used by occupant sensing controls to detect occupants
shall meet all of the following requirements:
A. Sensors shall not incorporate switches or mechanical devices that allow the sensor to be disabled
without changing the settings of the control.
B. Sensors that utilize ultrasonic radiation for detection of occupants shall:
ii. not emit audible sound; and
iii. not emit ultrasound in excess of the decibel levels shown in Table 110.9-A measured no more than
five feet from the source, on axis.
C. Sensors that utilize microwave radiation for detection of occupants shall:
ii. not emit radiation in excess of 1 milliwatt per square centimeter measured at no more than 5
centimeters from the emission surface of the device.
7. Indicator Lights. Indicator lights integral to lighting controls shall consume no more than one watt of
(c) Track Lighting Integral Current Limiter. An integral current limiter for line-voltage track lighting shall be
recognized for compliance with Part 6 only if it meets all of the following requirements:
SECTION 110.9 – MANDATORY REQUIREMENTS FOR LIGHTING CONTROLS
Page 126 2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards
1. Shall have the identical volt-ampere (VA) rating of the current limiter, as installed and rated for compliance
with Part 6 clearly marked as follows; and:
A. So that it is visible for the enforcement agency’s field inspection without opening coverplates, fixtures,
B. Permanently marked on the circuit breaker; and
C. On a factory-printed label that is permanently affixed to a nonremovable base-plate inside the wiring
2. Shall have a conspicuous factory installed label permanently affixed to the inside of the wiring compartment
warning against removing, tampering with, rewiring, or bypassing the device; and
3. Each electrical panel from which track lighting integral current limiters are energized shall have a factory
printed label permanently affixed and prominently located, stating the following: "NOTICE: Current
limiting devices installed in track lighting integral current limiters connected to this panel shall only be
replaced with the same or lower amperage. Adding track or replacement of existing current limiters with
higher continuous ampere rating will void the track lighting integral current limiter certification, and will
require resubmittal of compliance documentation to the enforcement agency responsible for compliance
with the California Title 24, Part 6 Building Energy Efficiency Standards.”
(d) Track Lighting Supplementary Overcurrent Protection Panel. A Track Lighting Supplementary Overcurrent
Protection Panel shall be used only for line-voltage track lighting and shall be recognized for compliance with
Part 6 only if it meets all of the following requirements:
1. Shall be listed as defined in Section 100.1; and
2. Shall have a permanently installed label that is prominently located stating the following: "NOTICE: This
Panel for Track Lighting Energy Code Compliance Only. The overcurrent protection devices in this panel
shall only be replaced with the same or lower amperage. No other overcurrent protective device shall be
added to this panel. Adding to, or replacement of existing overcurrent protective device(s) with higher
continuous ampere rating, will void the panel listing and require resubmittal of compliance documentation
to the enforcement agency responsible for compliance with the California Title 24, Part 6 Building Energy
TABLE 110.9-A - ULTRASOUND MAXIMUM DECIBEL VALUES
Mid-frequency of Sound Pressure Third-Octave Band Maximum db Level within Third-Octave Band
SECTION 110.9 – MANDATORY REQUIREMENTS FOR LIGHTING CONTROLS
2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards Page 127
SECTION 110.10 – MANDATORY REQUIREMENTS FOR SOLAR READY
1. Single Family Residences. Single family residences located in subdivisions with ten or more single family
residences and where the application for a tentative subdivision map for the residences has been deemed
complete approved by the enforcement agency, which do not have a photovoltaic system installed, shall
comply with the requirements of Sections 110.10(b) through 110.10(e).
2. Low-rise Multifamily Buildings. Low-rise multi-family buildings that do not have a photovoltaic system
installed shall comply with the requirements of Sections 110.10(b) through 110.10(d).
3. Hotel/Motel Occupancies and High-rise Multifamily Buildings. Hotel/motel occupancies and high-rise
multifamily buildings with ten habitable stories or fewer shall comply with the requirements of Sections
4. Nonresidential Buildings. Nonresidential buildings with three habitable stories or fewer, other than
healthcare facilities, shall comply with the requirements of Sections 110.10(b) through 110.10(d).
1. Minimum Solar Zone Area. The solar zone shall have a minimum total area as described below. The solar
zone shall comply with access, pathway, smoke ventilation, and spacing requirements as specified in Title
24, Part 9 or other Parts of Title 24 or in any requirements adopted by a local jurisdiction. The solar zone
total area shall be comprised of areas that have no dimension less than five feet and are no less than 80
square feet each for buildings with roof areas less than or equal to 10,000 square feet or no less than 160
square feet each for buildings with roof areas greater than 10,000 square feet.
A. Single Family Residences. The solar zone shall be located on the roof or overhang of the building and
have a total area no less than 250 square feet.
EXCEPTION 1 to Section 110.10(b)1A: Single family residences with a permanently installed
domestic solar water-heating system meeting the installation criteria specified in the Reference
Residential Appendix RA4 and with a minimum solar savings fraction of 0.50.
EXCEPTION 2 to Section 110.10(b)1A: Single family residences with three habitable stories or more
and with a total floor area less than or equal to 2000 square feet and having a solar zone total area no
EXCEPTION 3 to Section 110.10(b)1A: Single family residences located in the Wildland-Urban
Interface Fire Area as defined in Title 24, Part 2 and having a whole-house fan and having a solar zone
total area no less than 150 square feet.
EXCEPTION 4 to Section 110.10(b)1A: Buildings with a designated solar zone area that is no less
than 50 percent of the potential solar zone area. The potential solar zone area is the total area of any
low-sloped roofs where the annual solar access is 70 percent or greater and any steep-sloped roofs
oriented between 90° and 300° of true north where the annual solar access is 70 percent or greater.
Solar access is the ratio of solar insolation including shade to the solar insolation without shade.
Shading from obstructions located on the roof or any other part of the building shall not be included in
the determination of annual solar access.
EXCEPTION 5 to Section 110.10(b)1A: Single family residences having a solar zone total area no
less than 150 square feet and where all thermostats are demand responsive controls and comply with
Section 110.12(a), and are capable of receiving and responding to Demand Response Signals prior to
granting of an occupancy permit by the enforcing agency.
EXCEPTION 6 to Section 110.10(b)1A: Single family residences meeting the following conditions:
A. All thermostats are demand responsive controls that comply with Section 110.12(a), and are
capable of receiving and responding to Demand Response Signals prior to granting of an
occupancy permit by the enforcing agency.
B. Comply with one of the following measures:
SECTION 110.10 – MANDATORY REQUIREMENTS FOR SOLAR READY BUILDINGS
Page 128 2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards
i. Install a dishwasher that meets or exceeds the ENERGY STAR Program requirements with a
refrigerator that meets or exceeds the ENERGY STAR Program requirements, a whole-house
fan driven by an electronically commutated motor, or an SAE J1772 Level 2 Electric Vehicle
Supply Equipment (EVSE or EV Charger) with a minimum of 40 amperes; or
ii. Install a home automation system capable of, at a minimum, controlling the appliances and
lighting of the dwelling and responding to demand response signals; or
iii. Install alternative plumbing piping to permit the discharge from the clothes washer and all
showers and bathtubs to be used for an irrigation system in compliance with the California
Plumbing Code and any applicable local ordinances; or
iv. Install a rainwater catchment system designed to comply with the California Plumbing Code
and any applicable local ordinances, and that uses rainwater flowing from at least 65 percent
B. Low-rise and High-rise Multifamily Buildings, Hotel/Motel Occupancies, and Nonresidential
Buildings. The solar zone shall be located on the roof or overhang of the building or on the roof or
overhang of another structure located within 250 feet of the building or on covered parking installed
with the building project, and shall have a total area no less than 15 percent of the total roof area of the
building excluding any skylight area. The solar zone requirement is applicable to the entire building,
EXCEPTION 1 to Section 110.10(b)1B: High-rise Multifamily Buildings, Hotel/Motel Occupancies,
and Nonresidential Buildings with a permanently installed solar electric system having a nameplate DC
power rating, measured under Standard Test Conditions, of no less than one watt per square foot of roof
EXCEPTION 2 to Section 110.10(b)1B: High-rise Multifamily Buildings, Hotel/Motel Occupancies
with a permanently installed domestic solar water-heating system complying with Section
EXCEPTION 3 to Section 110.10(b)1B: Buildings with a designated solar zone area that is no less
than 50 percent of the potential solar zone area. The potential solar zone area is the total area of any
low-sloped roofs where the annual solar access is 70 percent or greater and any steep-sloped roofs
oriented between 90° and 300° of true north where the annual solar access is 70 percent or greater.
Solar access is the ratio of solar insolation including shade to the solar insolation without shade.
Shading from obstructions located on the roof or any other part of the building shall not be included in
the determination of annual solar access.
EXCEPTION 4 to Section 110.10(b)1B: Low-rise and high-rise multifamily buildings with all
thermostats in each dwelling unit are demand response controls that comply with Section 110.12(a),
and are capable of receiving and responding to Demand Response Signals prior to granting of an
occupancy permit by the enforcing agency. In addition, either A or B below:
A. In each dwelling unit, comply with one of the following measures:
i. Install a dishwasher that meets or exceeds the ENERGY STAR Program requirements with
either a refrigerator that meets or exceeds the ENERGY STAR Program requirements or a
whole-house fan driven by an electronically commutated motor; or
ii. Install a home automation system that complies with Section 110.12(a) and is capable of, at a
minimum, controlling the appliances and lighting of the dwelling and responding to demand
iii. Install alternative plumbing piping to permit the discharge from the clothes washer and all
showers and bathtubs to be used for an irrigation system in compliance with the California
Plumbing Code and any applicable local ordinances; or
iv. Install a rainwater catchment system designed to comply with the California Plumbing Code
and any applicable local ordinances, and that uses rainwater flowing from at least 65 percent
B. Meet the Title 24, Part 11, Section A4.106.8.2 requirements for electric vehicle charging spaces.
SECTION 110.10 – MANDATORY REQUIREMENTS FOR SOLAR READY BUILDINGS
2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards Page 129
EXCEPTION 5 to Section 110.10(b)1B: Buildings where the roof is designed and approved to be used for
vehicular traffic or parking or for a heliport.
2. Azimuth. All sections of the solar zone located on steep-sloped roofs shall be oriented between 90° and
A. No obstructions, including but not limited to, vents, chimneys, architectural features, and roof mounted
equipment, shall be located in the solar zone.
B. Any obstruction, located on the roof or any other part of the building that projects above a solar zone
shall be located at least twice the distance, measured in the horizontal plane, of the height difference
between the highest point of the obstruction and the horizontal projection of the nearest point of the
solar zone, measured in the vertical plane.
EXCEPTION to Section 110.10(b)3: Any roof obstruction, located on the roof or any other part of the
building, that is oriented north of all points on the solar zone.
4. Structural Design Loads on Construction Documents. For areas of the roof designated as solar zone, the
structural design loads for roof dead load and roof live load shall be clearly indicated on the construction
NOTE: Section 110.10(b)4 does not require the inclusion of any collateral loads for future solar energy
1. The construction documents shall indicate a location reserved for inverters and metering equipment and a
pathway reserved for routing of conduit from the solar zone to the point of interconnection with the
2. For single family residences and central water-heating systems, the construction documents shall indicate a
pathway for routing of plumbing from the solar zone to the water-heating system.
(d) Documentation. A copy of the construction documents or a comparable document indicating the information
from Sections 110.10(b) through 110.10(c) shall be provided to the occupant.
1. The main electrical service panel shall have a minimum busbar rating of 200 amps.
2. The main electrical service panel shall have a reserved space to allow for the installation of a double pole
circuit breaker for a future solar electric installation. The reserved space shall be permanently marked as
SECTION 110.10 – MANDATORY REQUIREMENTS FOR SOLAR READY BUILDINGS
Page 130 2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards
SECTION 110.11 – MANDATORY REQUIREMENTS FOR ELECTRICAL
Certification by Manufacturers. Any electrical power distribution system equipment listed in this section may be
installed only if the manufacture has certified to the Commission that the equipment complies with all the applicable
(a) Low-voltage dry-type distribution transformer shall be certified by the Manufacturer as required by the Title
11. transformer with tap range of 20 percent or more;
SECTION 110.11 – MANDATORY REQUIREMENTS FOR ELECTRICAL POWER DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM
2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards Page 131
SECTION 110.12 – MANDATORY REQUIREMENTS FOR DEMAND
Buildings, other than healthcare facilities, shall comply with the applicable demand responsive control
1. All demand responsive controls shall be either:
A. A certified OpenADR 2.0a or OpenADR 2.0b Virtual End Node (VEN), as specified under Clause
B. Certified by the manufacturer as being capable of responding to a demand response signal from a
certified OpenADR 2.0b Virtual End Node by automatically implementing the control functions
requested by the Virtual End Node for the equipment it controls.
2. All demand responsive controls shall be capable of communicating using one or more of the following:
3. Demand responsive controls may incorporate and use additional protocols beyond those specified in
4. When communications are disabled or unavailable, all demand responsive controls shall continue to
perform all other control functions provided by the control.
5. Demand responsive control thermostats shall comply with Reference Joint Appendix 5 (JA5),
Technical Specifications For Occupant Controlled Smart Thermostats.
(b) Demand Responsive Zonal HVAC Controls. Nonresidential HVAC systems with DDC to the Zone level
shall be programmed to allow centralized demand shed for noncritical zones as follows:
1. The controls shall have a capability to remotely increase the operating cooling temperature set points
by 4° or more in all noncritical zones on signal from a centralized contact or software point within an
Energy Management Control System (EMCS).
2. The controls shall have a capability to remotely decrease the operating heating temperature set points
by 4° or more in all noncritical zones on signal from a centralized contact or software point within an
3. The controls shall have capabilities to remotely reset the temperatures in all noncritical zones to
original operating levels on signal from a centralized contact or software point within an EMCS.
4. The controls shall be programmed to provide an adjustable rate of change for the temperature increase,
5. The controls shall have the following features:
A. Disabled. Disabled by authorized facility operators; and
B. Manual control. Manual control by authorized facility operators to allow adjustment of heating and
cooling set points globally from a single point in the EMCS; and
C. Automatic Demand Shed Control. Upon receipt of a demand response signal, the space-
conditioning systems shall conduct a centralized demand shed, as specified in Sections 110.12(b)1
and 110.12(b)2, for noncritical zones during the demand response period.
(c) Demand Responsive Lighting Controls. Lighting controls in nonresidential buildings larger than 10,000
square feet shall be capable of automatically reducing lighting power in response to a Demand Response
Signal. General lighting shall be reduced in a manner consistent with the uniform level of illumination
1. For compliance testing, the lighting controls shall demonstrate a lighting power reduction in controlled
spaces of a minimum of 15 percent below the total installed lighting power. The controls may provide
additional demand responsive functions or abilities.
SECTION 110.12 – MANDATORY REQUIREMENTS FOR DEMAND MANAGEMENT
Page 132 2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards
EXCEPTION 1 to 110.12(c): Spaces with a lighting power density of 0.5 watts per square foot or less are
not required to install demand responsive controls and do not count toward the 10,000 square foot threshold.
EXCEPTION 2 to 110.12(c): Spaces where a health or life safety statute, ordinance, or regulation does not
permit the lighting to be reduced are not required to install demand responsive controls and do not count
toward the 10,000 square foot threshold.
(d) Demand Responsive Electronic Message Center Control. Controls for electronic message centers greater
than 15 kW shall be capable of reducing the lighting power by a minimum of 30 percent when receiving a
EXCEPTION to Section 110.12(d): Electronic message centers that are not permitted by a health or life
SECTION 110.12 – MANDATORY REQUIREMENTS FOR DEMAND MANAGEMENT
2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards Page 133
Sections 120.1 through 120.9 establish requirements for the design and installation of building envelopes,
ventilation, space-conditioning and service water-heating systems and equipment in nonresidential, high-rise
residential, and hotel/motel buildings as well as covered processes that are within the scope of Section 100.0(a).
NOTE: The requirements of Sections 120.1 through 120.9 apply to newly constructed buildings. Section 141.0
specifies which requirements of Sections 120.1 through 120.9 also apply to additions or alterations to existing
Page 134 2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards
SECTION 120.1 – REQUIREMENTS FOR VENTILATION AND INDOOR
1. All occupiable spaces in high-rise residential buildings, hotel/motel buildings, and nonresidential buildings
other than healthcare facilities shall comply with the applicable requirements of Section 120.1(a) through
120.1(g). Healthcare facilities shall be ventilated in accordance with Chapter 4 of the California Mechanical
2. The required outdoor air-ventilation rate and the air-distribution system design shall be clearly identified on
the plans in accordance with Section 10-103 of Title 24, Part 1.
Attached dwellings units shall comply with the requirements of subsections 1 and 2 below. Occupiable spaces
other than attached dwelling units shall comply with the requirements of section 120.1(c).
A. System types specified in subsections i, ii, and iii shall be provided with air filters in accordance with
Sections 120.1(b)1B through 1D. System types specified in subsection i shall also comply with Section
i. Mechanical space conditioning systems that supply air to an occupiable space through ductwork
ii. Mechanical supply-only ventilation systems that provide outside air to an occupiable space.
iii. The supply side of mechanical balanced ventilation systems, including heat recovery ventilation
systems and energy recovery ventilation systems that provide outside air to an occupiable space.
i. The system shall be designed to ensure that all recirculated air or outdoor air supplied to the
occupiable space is filtered before passing through any system thermal conditioning components.
EXCEPTION to Section 120.1(b)1Bi: For heat recovery ventilators and energy recovery
ventilators the location of the filters required by Section 120.1(b) may be downstream of a system
thermal conditioning component, provided the system is equipped with ancillary filtration
upstream of the system’s thermal conditioning component.
ii. All systems shall be designed to accommodate the clean-filter pressure drop imposed by the
system air filter(s). The design airflow rate, and maximum allowable clean-filter pressure drop at
the design airflow rate applicable to each air filter shall be determined and reported on labels
Systems specified in Section 120.1(b)1Ai shall be equipped with air filters that meet either
a. Nominal two-inch minimum depth filter(s) shall be sized by the system designer; or
b. Nominal one-inch minimum depth filters(s) shall be allowed if the filter(s) are sized according
to Equation 120.1-A, based on a maximum face velocity of 150 ft per minute and according to
the maximum allowable clean filter pressure drop specified in Section 120.1(b)1Dii
A = air filter face area, the product of air filter nominal length × nominal width, ft2
Q = design airflow rate for the air filter, ft3/min
SECTION 120.1 – REQUIREMENTS FOR VENTILATION AND INDOOR AIR QUALITY
2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards Page 135
V = air filter face velocity ≤ 150, ft/min
iii. All system air filters shall be located and installed in such a manner as to be accessible for regular
iv. All system air filter installation locations shall be labeled to disclose the applicable design airflow
rate and the maximum allowable clean-filter pressure drop. The labels shall be permanently affixed
to the air filter installation location, readily legible, and visible to a person replacing the air filter.
C. Air Filter Efficiency. The system shall be provided with air filter(s) having a designated efficiency
equal to or greater than MERV 13 when tested in accordance with ASHRAE Standard 52.2, or a
particle size efficiency rating equal to or greater than 50 percent in the 0.30-1.0 μm range and equal to
or greater than 85 percent in the 1.0-3.0 μm range, when tested in accordance with AHRI Standard 680.
D. Air Filter Pressure Drop. All systems shall be provided with air filter(s) that conform to the applicable
maximum allowable clean-filter pressure drop specified by i, ii or iii below, when tested using
ASHRAE Standard 52.2, or as rated using AHRI Standard 680, for the applicable design airflow rate(s)
for the system air filter(s).
i. The maximum allowable clean-filter pressure drop determined by the system design for the
nominal two inch minimum depth air filter required by Section 120.1(b)1Biia; or
ii. A maximum of 25 PA (0.1 in. of water) clean-filter pressure drop shall be allowed for a nominal
one-inch depth air filter sized according to Section 120.1(b)1Biib; or
iii. For system specified in 120.1(b)1Aii, and 120.1(b)1Aiii, the maximum allowable clean filter
pressure drop determined by the system design.
E. Air Filter Product Labeling. Systems described in 120.1(b)1Ai shall be equipped with air filters that
have been labeled by the manufacturer to disclose the efficiency and pressure drop ratings that
demonstrate conformance with Sections 120.1(b)1.
EXCEPTION to Section 120.1(b)1: Evaporative coolers are not subject to the air filtration requirements of
2. Attached dwelling units. All dwelling units shall meet the requirements of ASHRAE Standard 62.2,
Ventilation and Acceptable Indoor Air Quality in Residential Buildings, subject to the amendments
specified in subsection A below. All dwelling units shall comply with the Acceptance requirements
i. Window operation is not a permissible method of providing the dwelling unit ventilation airflow
ii. Continuous operation of central forced air system air handlers used in central fan integrated
ventilation systems is not a permissible method of providing the dwelling unit ventilation airflow
required in Section 4 of ASHRAE Standard 62.2.
EXCEPTION to Section 120.1(b)2Aii: The Energy Commission may approve continuous
operation of central fan integrated ventilation systems pursuant to Section 10-109(h).
iii. Air filtration shall conform to the specifications in Section 120.1(b)1. Compliance with ASHRAE
62.2 Sections 6.7 (Minimum Filtration) and 6.7.1 (Filter Pressure Drop) shall not be required.
iv. Multifamily attached dwelling units shall comply with subsections a and b.
a. Mechanical ventilation airflow shall be provided at rates determined in accordance with
Total Required Ventilation Rate [ASHRAE 62.2.4.1.1]
Q = total required ventilation rate, cfm
SECTION 120.1 – REQUIREMENTS FOR VENTILATION AND INDOOR AIR QUALITY
Page 136 2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards
N = number of bedrooms (not to be less than 1)
b. The mechanical ventilation system shall comply with one of the following subsections 1 or 2
below. When subsection 2 is utilized for compliance, all dwelling units in the multifamily
building shall use the same ventilation system type.
1. A balanced mechanical ventilation system shall provide the required dwelling-unit
2. Continuously operating supply ventilation systems or continuous operating exhaust
ventilation systems shall be allowed to be used to provide the required dwelling unit
ventilation airflow if the dwelling-unit envelope leakage is less than or equal to 0.3 cubic
feet per minute at 50 Pa (0.2 in. of water) per ft2 of dwelling unit envelope surface area as
confirmed by field verification and diagnostic testing in accordance with Reference
v. Multifamily building central ventilation systems that serve multiple dwelling-units shall be
balanced to provide ventilation airflow to each dwelling-unit served at a rate equal to or greater
than the rate specified by Equation 120.1-B, but not more than twenty percent greater than the
specified rate. These systems shall utilize balancing means to ensure the dwelling unit airflows can
be adjusted to meet this balancing requirement. These system balancing means may include but not
be limited to constant air regulation devices, orifice plates, and variable speed central fans.
vi. Kitchen range hoods shall be rated for sound in accordance with Section 7.2 of ASHRAE 62.2.
EXCEPTION to Section 120.1(b)2Avii: Kitchen range hoods may be rated for sound at a static
pressure determined at working speed as specified in HVI 916 Section 7.2.
vii. Compliance with ASHRAE 62.2 Section 6.5.2 (Space Conditioning System Ducts) shall not be
viii. Compliance with ASHRAE 62.2 Section 4.4 (Control and Operation) shall require manual
switches associated with dwelling unit ventilation systems to have a label clearly displaying the
following text, or equivalent text: “This switch controls the indoor air quality ventilation for the
home. Leave it on unless the outdoor air quality is very poor.”
B. High-Rise Residential Dwelling Unit Acceptance.
i. Airflow Performance. The dwelling-unit ventilation airflow required by Section 120.1(b)2Aiv or
120.1(b)2Av shall be confirmed through field verification and diagnostic testing in accordance
with Reference Nonresidential Appendix NA7.18.1.
ii. Kitchen Range Hoods. The installed kitchen range hood shall be field verified in accordance with
Reference Nonresidential Appendix NA7.18.1 to confirm the model is rated by HVI to comply
a. The minimum ventilation airflow rate as specified in Section 5 of ASHRAE 62.2.
b. The maximum sound rating as specified in Section 120.1(b)2Avi.
(c) Nonresidential and Hotel/Motel Buildings. All occupiable spaces shall meet the requirements of subsection 1
A. Mechanical system types described in Section 120.1(b)1A shall be provided with air filters to clean the
outside and return air prior to its introduction into occupied spaces.
B. Air Filter Efficiency. The filters shall have a designated efficiency equal to or greater than MERV 13
when tested in accordance with ASHRAE Standard 52.2, or a particle size efficiency rating equal to or
greater than 50 percent in the 0.30-1.0 μm range, and equal to or greater than 85 percent in the 1.0-3.0
μm range when tested in accordance with AHRI Standard 680; and
C. Systems shall be equipped with air filters that meet either subsection i or ii below.
SECTION 120.1 – REQUIREMENTS FOR VENTILATION AND INDOOR AIR QUALITY
2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards Page 137
i. Nominal two inch minimum depth filter(s); or
ii. Nominal one inch minimum depth filter(s) shall be allowed if the filter(s) are sized according to
Equation 120.1-A, based on a maximum face velocity of 150 ft per minute.
2. Natural Ventilation. Naturally ventilated spaces shall be designed in accordance with 120.1(c)2A through
120.1(c)2C and include a mechanical ventilation system designed in accordance with 120.2(c)3:
A. Floor area to be ventilated. Spaces or portions of spaces to be naturally ventilated shall be located
within a distance based on the ceiling height, as specified in i, ii and iii. The ceiling height (H) to be
used in i, ii or iii shall be the minimum ceiling height in the space, or for ceilings that are increasing in
height as distance from the operable openings is increased, the ceiling height shall be determined as the
average height of the ceiling within 20 ft from the operable opening. [ASHRAE 62.1:6.4.1]
i. Single Side Opening. For spaces with operable opening on one side of the space, the maximum
distance from the operable opening shall be not more than 2H. [ASHRAE 62.1:6.4.1.1]
ii. Double Side Opening. For spaces with operable openings on two opposite sides of the space, the
maximum distance from the operable opening shall be not more than 5H. [ASHRAE 62.1:6.4.1.2]
iii. Corner Opening. For spaces with operable openings on two adjacent sides of a space, the
maximum distance from the operable openings shall be not more than 5H along a line drawn
between the two openings that are the farthest apart. Floor area outside that line shall comply with i
iv. Ceiling Height. The ceiling height (h) to be used in Section 120.1(c)2Ai through 120.1(c)2Aiii
shall be the minimum ceiling height in the space.
EXCEPTION to Section 120.1(c)2Aiv: For ceilings that are increasing in height as distance from
the opening is increased, the ceiling height shall be determined as the average height of the ceiling
within 20 feet from the operable openings. [ASHRAE 62.1:6.4.1.4]
B. Location and Size of Openings. Spaces or portions of spaces to be naturally ventilated shall be
permanently open to operable wall openings directly to the outdoors. The openable area shall be not
less than 4 percent of the net occupiable floor area. Where openings are covered with louvers or
otherwise obstructed, the openable area shall be based on the net free unobstructed area through the
opening. Where interior rooms, or portions of rooms, without direct openings to the outdoors are
ventilated through adjoining rooms, the opening between rooms shall be permanently unobstructed and
have a free area of not less than 8 percent of the area of the interior room or less than 25 square feet.
C. Control and Accessibility. The means to open the required operable opening shall be readily accessible
to building occupants whenever the space is occupied. Controls shall be designed to coordinate
operation of the natural and mechanical ventilation systems. [ASHRAE 62.1:6.4.3]
EXCEPTION 1 to Section 120.1(c)2: The mechanical ventilation system shall not be required where natural
ventilation openings complying with 120.1(c)2 are either permanently open or have controls that prevent the
openings from being closed during periods of expected occupancy.
EXCEPTION 2 to Section 120.1(c)2: The mechanical ventilation system shall not be required where the zone
is not served by a space conditioning system.
3. Mechanical Ventilation. Occupiable spaces shall be ventilated with a mechanical ventilation system
capable of providing an outdoor airflow rate (V) to the zone no less than the larger of A or B as described
A. The outdoor airflow rate to the zone (V) shall be determined in accordance with Equation 120.1-F; or
R = Outdoor airflow rate required per unit area as determined from Table 120.1-A.
A = Zone floor area is the net occupiable floor area of the ventilation zone in square feet. B.
SECTION 120.1 – REQUIREMENTS FOR VENTILATION AND INDOOR AIR QUALITY
Page 138 2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards
For spaces designed for an expected number of occupants or spaces with fixed seating, the outdoor
airflow rate to the zone (V) shall be determined in accordance with Equation 120.1-G;
R = 15 cubic feet per minute of outdoor airflow per person
P = The expected number of occupants. The expected number of occupants shall be the expected
number specified by the building designer. For spaces with fixed seating, the expected number
of occupants shall be determined in accordance with the California Building Code.
EXCEPTION to Section 120.1(c)3: Transfer air. The rate of outdoor air required by Section 120.1(c)3
may be provided with air transferred from other ventilated space if:
A. Use of transfer air is in accordance with Section 120.1(g); and
B. The outdoor air that is supplied to all spaces combined, is sufficient to meet the requirements of Section
4. Exhaust Ventilation. The design exhaust airflow shall be determined in accordance with the requirements
in Table 120.1-B. Exhaust makeup air shall be permitted to be any combination of outdoor air, recirculated
(d) Operation and Control Requirements for Minimum Quantities of Outdoor Air.
1. Times of occupancy. The minimum rate of outdoor air required by Section 120.1(c) shall be supplied to
each space at all times when the space is usually occupied.
EXCEPTION 1 to Section 120.1(d)1: Demand control ventilation. In intermittently occupied spaces that
do not have processes or operations that generate dusts, fumes, mists, vapors or gasses and are not provided
with local exhaust ventilation (such as indoor operation of internal combustion engines or areas designated
for unvented food service preparation), the rate of outdoor air may be reduced if the ventilation system
serving the space is controlled by a demand control ventilation device complying with Section 120.1(d)4 or
by an occupant sensor ventilation control device complying with Section 120.1(d)5.
EXCEPTION 2 to Section 120.1(d)1: Temporary reduction. The rate of outdoor air provided to a space
may be reduced below the level required by Section 120.1(c) for up to 30 minutes at a time if the average
rate for each hour is equal to or greater than the required ventilation rate.
2. Pre-occupancy. The lesser of the minimum rate of outdoor air required by Section 120.1(c) or three
complete air changes shall be supplied to the entire building during the 1-hour period immediately before
3. Required Demand Control Ventilation. Demand ventilation controls complying with Section 120.1(d)4
are required for a space with a design occupant density, or a maximum occupant load factor for egress
purposes in the CBC, greater than or equal to 25 people per 1000 square feet (40 square feet or less per
person) if the system serving the space has one or more of the following:
C. design outdoor airflow rate > 3,000 cfm.
EXCEPTION 1 to Section 120.1(d)3: Where space exhaust is greater than the design ventilation rate
specified in Section 120.1(c)3 minus 0.2 cfm per ft² of conditioned area.
EXCEPTION 2 to Section 120.1(d)3: Spaces that have processes or operations that generate dusts, fumes,
mists, vapors, or gases and are not provided with local exhaust ventilation, such as indoor operation of
internal combustion engines or areas designated for unvented food service preparation, daycare sickrooms,
science labs, barber shops or beauty and nail salons shall not install demand control ventilation.
EXCEPTION 3 to Section 120.1(d)3: Spaces with an area of less than 150 square feet, or a design
occupancy of less than 10 people as specified by Section 120.1(c)3.
SECTION 120.1 – REQUIREMENTS FOR VENTILATION AND INDOOR AIR QUALITY
2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards Page 139
A. For each system with demand control ventilation (DCV), CO sensors shall be installed in each room
that meets the criteria of Section 120.1(d)3 with no less than one sensor per 10,000 ft² of floor space.
When a zone or a space is served by more than one sensor, a signal from any sensor indicating that CO
is near or at the setpoint within the zone or space shall trigger an increase in ventilation.
B. CO sensors shall be located in the room between 3 ft and 6 ft above the floor or at the anticipated
C. Demand ventilation controls shall maintain CO concentrations less than or equal to 600 ppm plus the
outdoor air CO concentration in all rooms with CO sensors.
EXCEPTION to Section 120.1(d)4C: The outdoor air ventilation rate is not required to be larger than
the design outdoor air ventilation rate required by Section 120.1(c)3 regardless of CO concentration.
D. Outdoor air CO concentration shall be determined by one of the following:
i. CO concentration shall be assumed to be 400 ppm without any direct measurement; or
ii. CO concentration shall be dynamically measured using a CO sensor located within 4 ft of the
E. When the system is operating during hours of expected occupancy, the controls shall maintain system
outdoor air ventilation rates no less than the rate listed in Table 120.1-A for DCV, times the
conditioned floor area for spaces with CO sensors, plus the rate required by Section 120.1(c)3 for other
spaces served by the system, or the exhaust air rate whichever is greater.
F. CO sensors shall be certified by the manufacturer to be accurate within plus or minus 75 ppm at a 600
and 1000 ppm concentration when measured at sea level and 25°C, factory calibrated, and certified by
the manufacturer to require calibration no more frequently than once every 5 years. Upon detection of
sensor failure, the system shall provide a signal which resets to supply the minimum quantity of outside
air to levels required by Section 120.1(c)3 to the zone serviced by the sensor at all times that the zone is
G. The CO sensor(s) reading for each zone shall be displayed continuously, and shall be recorded on
systems with DDC to the zone level.
5. Occupant Sensor Ventilation Control Devices. When occupancy sensor ventilation devices are required
by Section 120.2(e)3, occupant sensors shall be used to reduce the rate of outdoor airflow when occupants
are not present in accordance with the following:
A. Occupant sensors shall meet the requirements in Section 110.9(b)4 and shall have suitable coverage
and placement to detect occupants in the entire space ventilated. If occupant sensors controlling
lighting are used for ventilation, the ventilation signal shall be independent of daylighting, manual
lighting overrides or manual control of lighting. When a single zone damper or a single zone system
serves multiple rooms, there shall be an occupancy sensor in each room and the zone is not considered
vacant until all rooms in the zone are vacant.
B. One hour prior to normal scheduled occupancy, the occupancy sensor ventilation control shall allow
pre-occupancy purge as described in Section 120.1(d)2.
(e) Ducting for Zonal Heating and Cooling Units. Where a return plenum is used to distribute outdoor air to a
zonal heating or cooling unit which then supplies the air to a space in order to meet the requirements of Section
120.1(c)3, the outdoor air shall be ducted to discharge either:
2. Within 15 feet of the unit, substantially toward the unit, and at a velocity not less than 500 feet per minute.
(f) Design and Control Requirements for Quantities of Outdoor Air.
1. All mechanical ventilation and space-conditioning systems shall be designed with and have installed
ductwork, dampers, and controls to allow outside air rates to be operated at the larger of (1) the minimum
levels specified in Section 120.1(c)3 or (2) the rate required for make-up of exhaust systems that are
SECTION 120.1 – REQUIREMENTS FOR VENTILATION AND INDOOR AIR QUALITY
Page 140 2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards
required for an exempt or covered process, for control of odors, or for the removal of contaminants within
2. All variable air volume mechanical ventilation and space-conditioning systems shall include dynamic
controls that maintain measured outside air ventilation rates within 10 percent of the required outside air
ventilation rate at both full and reduced supply airflow conditions. Fixed minimum damper position is not
considered to be dynamic and is not an allowed control strategy.
3. Measured outdoor air rates of constant volume mechanical ventilation and space-conditioning systems shall
be within 10 percent of the required outside air rate.
(g) Air Classification and Recirculation Limitations. Air classification and recirculation limitations of air shall be
based on the air classification as listed in Table 120.1-A or Table 120.1-C, and in accordance with the
1. Class 1 Air. Recirculation or transfer of Class 1 air to any space shall be permitted; [ASHRAE
2. Class 2 Air. Recirculation or transfer of Class 2 air shall be permitted in accordance with 120.1(g)A
A. Recirculation of Class 2 air within the space of origin shall be permitted [ASHRAE 62.1:5.16.3.2.1]:
B. Recirculation or transfer of Class 2 to other Class 2 or Class 3 spaces shall be permitted, provided that
the other spaces are used for the same or similar purpose or task and involve the same or similar
D. Recirculation or transfer of Class 2 air to Class 4 spaces [ASHRAE 62.1:5.16.3.2.4]; or
E. Class 2 air shall not be recirculated or transferred to Class 1 spaces. [ASHRAE 62.1:5.16.3.2.5]
EXCEPTION to Section 120.1(g)2E: When using any energy recovery device, recirculation from leakage,
carryover, or transfer from the exhaust side of the energy recovery device is permitted. Recirculated Class 2
air shall not exceed 10% of the outdoor air intake flow.
3. Class 3 Air. Recirculation or transfer of Class 3 air shall be permitted in accordance with 120.1(g)3A and
A. Recirculation of Class 3 air within the space of origin shall be permitted. [ASHRAE 62.1:5.16.3.3.1]
B. Class 3 air shall not be recirculated or transferred to any other space. [ASHRAE 62.1:5.16.3.3.2].
EXCEPTION to Section 120.1(g)3B: When using any energy recovery device, recirculation from leakage,
carryover, or transfer from the exhaust side of the energy recovery device is permitted. Recirculated Class 3
air shall not exceed 5% of the outdoor air intake flow.
4. Class 4 Air. Class 4 air shall not be recirculated or transferred to any space or recirculated within the space
5. Ancillary spaces. Redesignation of Class 1 air to Class 2 air shall be permitted for Class 1 spaces that are
6. Transfer. A mixture of air that has been transferred through or returned form spaces or locations with
different air classes shall be redesignated with the highest classification among the air classes mixed.
7. Classification. Air leaving each space or location shall be designated at an expected air-quality
classification not less than that shown in Tables 120.1-A, 120.1-B or 120.1-C. Air leaving spaces or
locations that are not listed in Tables 120.1-A, 120.1-B or 120.1-C shall be designated with the same
classification as air from the most similar space or location listed in terms of occupant activities and
SECTION 120.1 – REQUIREMENTS FOR VENTILATION AND INDOOR AIR QUALITY
2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards Page 141
Table 120.1-A – Minimum Ventilation Rates
Area Outdoor Min Air Rate
Occupancy Category a Air Class Notes
Food and Beverage Service
Occupiable storage rooms for liquids or gels 0.15 2 B
Laundry rooms within dwelling units 0.15 1
SECTION 120.1 – REQUIREMENTS FOR VENTILATION AND INDOOR AIR QUALITY
Page 142 2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards
Table 120.1-A – Minimum Ventilation Rates [Continued]
Area Outdoor Min Air Rate
Air Rate R for DCVb
Occupancy Category a Air Class Notes
Occupiable storage rooms for dry materials 0.15 1
Freezer and refrigerated spaces (<50oF) - 2 E
industrial and process using chemicals)
Libraries (reading rooms and stack areas) 0.15 1
SECTION 120.1 – REQUIREMENTS FOR VENTILATION AND INDOOR AIR QUALITY
2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards Page 143
Table 120.1-A – Minimum Ventilation Rates [Continued]
Area Outdoor Min Air Rate
Air Rate R for DCVb
Occupancy Category a Air Class Notes
Beauty and nail salons 0.40 2
1 Ra was determined as being the larger of the area method and the default per person method. The occupant density used in the per person
method was assumed to be one half of the maximum occupant load assumed for egress purposes in the CBC.
2If this column specifies a minimum cfm/ft2 then it shall be used to comply with Section 120.1(d)4E.
A – For high-school and college libraries, the values shown for “Public Assembly Spaces – Libraries” shall be used.
B – Rate may not be sufficient where stored materials include those having potentially harmful emissions.
C – Rate does not allow for humidity control. “Deck area” refers to the area surrounding the pool that is capable of being wetted during pool
use or when the pool is occupied. Deck area that is not expected to be wetted shall be designated as an occupancy category.
D – Rate does not include special exhaust for stage effects such as dry ice vapors and smoke.
E – Where combustion equipment is intended to be used on the playing surface or in the space, additional dilution ventilation, source control,
F – Ventilation air for this occupancy category shall be permitted to be reduced to zero when the space is in occupied-standby mode
SECTION 120.1 – REQUIREMENTS FOR VENTILATION AND INDOOR AIR QUALITY
Page 144 2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards
Table 120.1-B – Minimum Exhaust Rates
Occupancy Category cfm/unit cfm/ft2 Air Class Notes
Beauty and nail salons - 0.60 2
Locker rooms for athletic or industrial facilities - 0.50 2
All other locker rooms - 0.25 2
Soiled laundry storage rooms - 1.00 3 F
A – Stands where engines are run shall have exhaust systems that directly connect to the engine exhaust and prevent escape of fumes.
B – Where combustion equipment is intended to be used on the playing surface, additional dilution ventilation, source control, or both shall be
C – Exhaust shall not be required where two or more sides comprise walls that are at least 50% open to the outside.
D – Rate is per water closet, urinal, or both. Provide the higher rate where periods of heavy use are expected to occur. The lower rate shall be
E – Rate is for a toilet room intended to be occupied by one person at a time. For continuous systems operation during hours of use, the lower
rate shall be permitted to be used. Otherwise the higher rate shall be used.
F – See other applicable standards for exhaust rate.
G – For continuous system operation, the lower rate shall be permitted to be used. Otherwise the higher rate shall be used.
SECTION 120.1 – REQUIREMENTS FOR VENTILATION AND INDOOR AIR QUALITY
2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards Page 145
Diazo printing equipment discharge 4
Commercial kitchen grease hoods 4
Commercial kitchen hoods other than grease 3
Hydraulic elevator machine room 2
a.Air Class 4 unless determined otherwise by the Environmental Health and Safety professional responsible to the owner or to the owner’s
SECTION 120.1 – REQUIREMENTS FOR VENTILATION AND INDOOR AIR QUALITY
Page 146 2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards
SECTION 120.2 – REQUIRED CONTROLS FOR SPACE-CONDITIONING
Nonresidential, high-rise residential, and hotel/motel buildings shall comply with the applicable requirements of
(a) Thermostatic Controls for Each Zone. The supply of heating and cooling energy to each space-conditioning
zone or dwelling unit shall be controlled by an individual thermostatic control that responds to temperature
within the zone and that meets the applicable requirements of Section 120.2(b). An Energy Management Control
System (EMCS) may be installed to comply with the requirements of one or more thermostatic controls if it
complies with all applicable requirements for each thermostatic control.
EXCEPTION to Section 120.2(a): An independent perimeter heating or cooling system may serve more than
one zone without individual thermostatic controls if:
1. All zones are also served by an interior cooling system; and
2. The perimeter system is designed solely to offset envelope heat losses or gains; and
3. The perimeter system has at least one thermostatic control for each building orientation of 50 feet or more;
4. The perimeter system is controlled by at least one thermostat located in one of the zones served by the
(b) Criteria for Zonal Thermostatic Controls. The individual thermostatic controls required by Section 120.2(a)
shall meet the following requirements as applicable:
1. Where used to control comfort heating, the thermostatic controls shall be capable of being set, locally or
2. Where used to control comfort cooling, the thermostatic controls shall be capable of being set, locally or
3. Where used to control both comfort heating and comfort cooling, the thermostatic controls shall meet Items
1 and 2 and shall be capable of providing a temperature range or deadband of at least 5°F within which the
supply of heating and cooling energy to the zone is shut off or reduced to a minimum.
EXCEPTION 1 to Section 120.2(b)3: Systems with thermostats that require manual changeover between
EXCEPTION 2 to Section 120.2(b)3: Systems serving healthcare facilities.
4. Thermostatic controls for all single zone air conditioners and heat pumps, shall comply with the
requirements of Sections 110.2(c) and 110.12(a) and, if equipped with DDC to the Zone level, with the
Automatic Demand Shed Controls of Section 110.12(b).
EXCEPTION 1 to Section 120.2(b)4: Systems serving exempt process loads that must have constant
temperatures to prevent degradation of materials, a process, plants or animals.
EXCEPTION 2 to Section 120.2(b)4:Package terminal air conditioners, package terminal heat pumps,
room air conditioners, and room air-conditioner heat pumps.
EXCEPTION 3 to Section 120.2(b)4: Systems serving healthcare facilities.
(c) Hotel/Motel Guest Room and High-rise Residential Dwelling Unit Thermostats.
A. Have numeric temperature setpoints in °F and °C; and
B. Have setpoint stops, which are accessible only to authorized personnel, such that guest room occupants
cannot adjust the setpoint more than ±5°F (±3°C); and
C. Meet the requirements of Section 110.2(c).
SECTION 120.2 – REQUIRED CONTROLS FOR SPACE-CONDITIONING SYSTEMS
2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards Page 147
EXCEPTION to Section 120.2(c)1: Thermostats that are integrated into the room heating and cooling
2. High-rise residential dwelling unit thermostats shall meet the requirements of Section 110.2(c).
(d) Heat Pump Controls. All heat pumps with supplementary electric resistance heaters shall be installed with
controls that comply with Section 110.2(b).
(e) Shut-off and Reset Controls for Space-conditioning Systems. Each space-conditioning system shall be
installed with controls that comply with the following:
1. The control shall be capable of automatically shutting off the system during periods of nonuse and shall
A. An automatic time switch control device complying with Section 110.9, with an accessible manual
override that allows operation of the system for up to 4 hours; or
C. A 4-hour timer that can be manually operated.
EXCEPTION to Section 120.2(e)1: Mechanical systems serving retail stores and associated malls,
restaurants, grocery stores, churches, and theaters equipped with 7-day programmable timers.
2. The control shall automatically restart and temporarily operate the system as required to maintain:
A. A setback heating thermostat setpoint if the system provides mechanical heating; and
EXCEPTION to Section 120.2(e)2A: Thermostat setback controls are not required in nonresidential
buildings in areas where the Winter Median of Extremes outdoor air temperature determined in
accordance with Section 140.4(b)3 is greater than 32°F.
B. A setup cooling thermostat setpoint if the system provides mechanical cooling.
EXCEPTION to Section 120.2(e)2B: Thermostat setup controls are not required in nonresidential
buildings in areas where the Summer Design Dry Bulb 0.5 percent temperature determined in
accordance with Section 140.4(b)3 is less than 100°F.
3. Occupancy Sensing Zone Controls. Space conditioning systems serving room(s) that are required to have
occupant sensing controls in accordance with Section 130.1(c), and where the Table 120.1-A occupancy
category permits ventilation air to be reduced to zero when the space is in occupied-standby mode, shall
A. The zone shall be placed in occupied standby mode when all room(s) served by the zone are
unoccupied for more than 5 minutes; and
i. Automatically set up the operating cooling temperature set point by 2°F or more and set back the
operating heating temperature set point by 2°F or more; or
ii. For multiple zone systems with Direct Digital Controls (DDC) to the zone level, set up the
operating cooling temperature setpoint by 0.5°F or more and set back the operating heating
C. During occupied-standby mode, all airflow to the zone shall be shut off whenever the space
temperature is between the active heating and cooling setpoints.
EXCEPTION 1 to Sections 120.2(e)1, 2, and 3: Where it can be demonstrated to the satisfaction of the
enforcing agency that the system serves an area that must operate continuously.
EXCEPTION 2 to Sections 120.2(e)1, 2, and 3: Systems with full load demands of 2 kW or less, if they
have a readily accessible manual shut-off switch.
EXCEPTION 3 to Sections 120.2(e)1 and 2: Systems serving hotel/motel guest rooms, if they have a
readily accessible manual shut-off switch.
SECTION 120.2 – REQUIRED CONTROLS FOR SPACE-CONDITIONING SYSTEMS
Page 148 2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards
4. Hotel and motel guest rooms shall have captive card key controls, occupancy sensing controls, or automatic
controls such that, no longer than 30 minutes after the guest room has been vacated, setpoints are set up at
least +5°F (+3°C) in cooling mode and set down at least -5°F (-3°C) in heating mode.
EXCEPTION to Section 120.2(e): Systems serving healthcare facilities.
(f) Dampers for Air Supply and Exhaust Equipment. Outdoor air supply and exhaust equipment shall be
installed with dampers that automatically close upon fan shutdown.
EXCEPTION 1 to Section 120.2(f): Equipment that serves an area that must operate continuously.
EXCEPTION 2 to Section 120.2(f): Gravity and other nonelectrical equipment that has readily accessible
EXCEPTION 3 to Section 120.2(f): At combustion air intakes and shaft vents.
EXCEPTION 4 to Section 120.2(f): Where prohibited by other provisions of law.
(g) Isolation Area Devices. Each space-conditioning system serving multiple zones with a combined conditioned
floor area of more than 25,000 square feet shall be designed, installed, and controlled to serve isolation areas.
1. Each zone, or any combination of zones not exceeding 25,000 square feet, shall be a separate isolation area.
2. Each isolation area shall be provided with isolation devices, such as valves or dampers that allow the supply
of heating or cooling to be reduced or shut-off independently of other isolation areas.
3. Each isolation area shall be controlled by a device meeting the requirements of Section 120.2(e)1.
EXCEPTION to Section 120.2(g): Zones designed to be conditioned continuously.
(h) Automatic Demand Shed Controls. See Section 110.12 for requirements for Automatic Demand Shed
(i) Economizer Fault Detection and Diagnostics (FDD). All newly installed air handlers with a mechanical
cooling capacity greater than 54,000 Btu/hr and an installed air economizer shall include a stand-alone or
integrated Fault Detection and Diagnostics (FDD) system in accordance with Subsections 120.2(i)1 through
1. The following temperature sensors shall be permanently installed to monitor system operation: outside air,
supply air, and when required for differential economizer operation, a return air sensor; and
2. Temperature sensors shall have an accuracy of ±2°F over the range of 40°F to 80°F; and
3. The controller shall have the capability of displaying the value of each sensor; and
4. The controller shall provide system status by indicating the following conditions:
D. Heating enabled, if the system is capable of heating; and
E. Mixed air low limit cycle active.
5. The unit controller shall allow manual initiation of each operating mode so that the operation of cooling
systems, economizers, fans, and heating systems can be independently tested and verified; and
6. Faults shall be reported in one of the following ways:
A. Reported to an Energy Management Control System regularly monitored by facility personnel.
B. Annunciated locally on one or more zone thermostats, or a device within five (5) feet of zone
thermostat(s), clearly visible, at eye level, and meeting the following requirements:
i. On the thermostat, device, or an adjacent written sign, display instructions to contact appropriate
building personnel or an HVAC technician; and
SECTION 120.2 – REQUIRED CONTROLS FOR SPACE-CONDITIONING SYSTEMS
2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards Page 149
ii. In buildings with multiple tenants, the annunciation shall either be within property management
offices or in a common space accessible by the property or building manager.
C. Reported to a fault management application which automatically provides notification of the fault to
7. The FDD system shall detect the following faults:
8. The FDD System shall be certified by the Energy Commission as meeting requirements of Sections
EXCEPTION to 120.2(i)8: FDD algorithms based in Direct Digital Control systems are not required to be
(j) Direct Digital Controls (DDC). Direct Digital Controls to the zone shall be provided as specified by Table
The provided DDC system shall meet the control logic requirements of Sections 120.1(d) and 120.2(h), and be
1. Monitoring zone and system demand for fan pressure, pump pressure, heating and cooling;
2. Transferring zone and system demand information from zones to air distribution system controllers and
from air distribution systems to heating and cooling plant controllers;
3. Automatically detecting the zones and systems that may be excessively driving the reset logic and generate
an alarm or other indication to the system operator;
4. Readily allow operator removal of zones(s) from the reset algorithm;
5. For new buildings, trending and graphically displaying input and output points; and
6. Resetting heating and cooling setpoints in all noncritical zones upon receipt of a signal from a centralized
contact or software point as described in Section 120.2(h).
SECTION 120.2 – REQUIRED CONTROLS FOR SPACE-CONDITIONING SYSTEMS
Page 150 2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards
TABLE 120.2-A DDC Applications and Qualifications
Building Status Applications Qualifications
Newly Constructed Buildings Air-handling system and all Individual systems supplying
zones served by the system more than three zones and with
Newly Constructed Buildings Chilled water plant and all coils Individual plants supplying more
and terminal units served by the than three zones and with design
Newly Constructed Buildings Hot water plant and all coils and Individual plants supplying more
terminal units served by the than three zones and with design
Additions or Alterations Zone terminal unit such as VAV Where existing zones served by
box the same air-handling, chilled
water, or hot water systems that
Additions or Alterations Air-handling system or fan coil Where existing air-handling
by the same chilled or hot water
Additions or Alterations New air-handling system and all Individual systems with design
new zones served by the system heating or cooling capacity of
supplying more than three zones
and more than 75 percent of
Additions or Alterations New or upgraded chilled water Where all chillers are new and
plant plant design cooling capacity is
Additions or Alterations New or upgraded hot water plant Where all boilers are new and
plant design heating capacity is
(k) Optimum Start/Stop Controls. Space conditioning systems with DDC to the zone level shall have optimum
start/stop controls. The control algorithm shall, as a minimum, be a function of the difference between space
temperature and occupied setpoint, the outdoor air temperature, and the amount of time prior to scheduled
occupancy. Mass radiant floor slab systems shall incorporate floor temperature onto the optimum start
EXCEPTION to Section 120.2(k): Systems that must operate continuously.
SECTION 120.2 – REQUIRED CONTROLS FOR SPACE-CONDITIONING SYSTEMS
2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards Page 151
SECTION 120.3 – REQUIREMENTS FOR PIPE INSULATION
Nonresidential, high-rise residential, and hotel/motel buildings shall comply with the applicable requirements of
(a) General Requirements. The piping conditions listed below for space-conditioning and service water-heating
systems with fluid normal operating temperatures listed in TABLE 120.3-A, shall have at least the amount of
1. Space Cooling Systems. All refrigerant suction, chilled water, and brine fluid distribution systems.
2. Space Heating Systems. All refrigerant, steam, steam condensate and hot water fluid distribution systems.
A. Recirculating system piping, including the supply and return piping to the water heater.
B. The first 8 feet of hot and cold outlet piping, including piping between a storage tank and a heat trap,
C. Pipes that are externally heated.
Insulation conductivity shall be determined in accordance with ASTM C335 at the mean temperature listed in
TABLE 120.3-A, and shall be rounded to the nearest 1/100 Btu-inch per hour per square foot per °F. Fluid
distribution systems include all elements that are in series with the fluid flow, such as pipes, pumps, valves, strainers,
coil u-bends, and air separators, but not including elements that are not in series with the fluid flow, such as
expansion tanks, fill lines, chemical feeders, and drains.
(b) Insulation Protection. Pipe Insulation shall be protected from damage due to sunlight, moisture, equipment
maintenance, and wind. Protection shall, at minimum, include the following:
1. Pipe insulation exposed to weather shall be protected by a cover suitable for outdoor service. The cover
shall be water retardant and provide shielding from solar radiation that can cause degradation of the
material. Adhesive tape shall not be used to provide this protection.
2. Pipe insulation covering chilled water piping and refrigerant suction piping located outside the conditioned
space shall include, or be protected by, a Class I or Class II vapor retarder. All penetrations and joints shall
3. Pipe insulation buried below grade must be installed in a water proof and non-crushable casing or sleeve.
1. For insulation with a conductivity in the range shown in TABLE 120.3-A for the applicable fluid temperature
range, the insulation shall have the applicable minimum thickness or R-value shown in TABLE 120.3-A.
2. For insulation with a conductivity outside the range shown in TABLE 120.3-A for the applicable fluid
temperature range, the insulation shall have a minimum R-value shown in TABLE 120.3-A or thickness as
SECTION 120.3 – REQUIREMENTS FOR PIPE INSULATION
Page 152 2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards
MINIMUM INSULATION THICKNESS EQUATION
T = Minimum insulation thickness for material with conductivity K, inches.
t = Insulation thickness from TABLE 120.3-A, inches.
K = Conductivity of alternate material at the mean rating temperature indicated in TABLE 120.3-A for
the applicable fluid temperature range, in Btu-inch per hour per square foot per °F.
k = The lower value of the conductivity range listed in TABLE 120.3-A for the applicable fluid
temperature range, Btu-inch per hour per square foot per °F.
SECTION 120.3 – REQUIREMENTS FOR PIPE INSULATION
2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards Page 153
TABLE 120.3-A PIPE INSULATION THICKNESS
Fluid Nominal Pipe Diameter (in inches)
Space heating and Service Water Heating Systems
(Steam, Steam Condensate, Refrigerant, Space Heating, Minimum Pipe Insulation Required (Thickness in inches or R-value)
Space cooling systems (chilled water, refrigerant and
Minimum Pipe Insulation Required (Thickness in inches or R-value)1
R-value Nonres Res Nonres Res R 7 R 6 R 5
1. These thickness are based on energy efficiency considerations only. Issues such as water vapor permeability or surface condensation
sometimes require vapor retarders or additional insulation.
EXCEPTION 1 to Section 120.3: Factory-installed piping within space-conditioning equipment certified under
EXCEPTION 2 to Section 120.3: Piping that conveys fluids with a design operating temperature range between
EXCEPTION 3 to Section 120.3: Where the heat gain or heat loss to or from piping without insulation will not
increase building source energy use.
EXCEPTION 4 to Section 120.3: Piping that penetrates framing members shall not be required to have pipe
insulation for the distance of the framing penetration. Metal piping that penetrates metal framing shall use grommets,
plugs, wrapping or other insulating material to assure that no contact is made with the metal framing.
SECTION 120.3 – REQUIREMENTS FOR PIPE INSULATION
Page 154 2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards
SECTION 120.4 – REQUIREMENTS FOR AIR DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM
Nonresidential, high-rise residential, and hotel/motel buildings shall comply with the applicable requirements of
EXCEPTION to Section 120.4: Systems serving healthcare facilities shall comply with the applicable requirements
(a) CMC Compliance. All air distribution system ducts and plenums, including, but not limited to, building
cavities, mechanical closets, air-handler boxes and support platforms used as ducts or plenums, shall meet the
Duct Construction Standards Metal and Flexible 3rd Edition, incorporated herein by reference. Connections of
metal ducts and the inner core of flexible ducts shall be mechanically fastened. Openings shall be sealed with
mastic, tape, aerosol sealant, or other duct-closure system that meets the applicable requirements of UL 181, UL
181A, or UL 181B. If mastic or tape is used to seal openings greater than 1/4 inch, the combination of mastic
and either mesh or tape shall be used.
Portions of supply-air and return-air ducts conveying heated or cooled air located in one or more of the
following spaces shall be insulated to a minimum installed level of R-8:
2. In a space between the roof and an insulated ceiling; or
3. In a space directly under a roof with fixed vents or openings to the outside or unconditioned spaces; or
Portions of supply-air ducts that are not in one of these spaces, including ducts buried in concrete slab, shall be
insulated to a minimum installed level of R-4.2 or be enclosed in directly conditioned space.
A. All factory-fabricated duct systems shall comply with UL 181 for ducts and closure systems, including
collars, connections, and splices, and be labeled as complying with UL 181. UL 181 testing may be
performed by UL laboratories or a laboratory approved by the Executive Director.
B. All pressure-sensitive tapes, heat-activated tapes, and mastics used in the manufacture of rigid
fiberglass ducts shall comply with UL 181 and UL 181A.
C. All pressure-sensitive tapes and mastics used with flexible ducts shall comply with UL 181 and UL
D. Joints and seams of duct systems and their components shall not be sealed with cloth-back rubber
adhesive duct tapes unless such tape is used in combination with mastic and drawbands.
A. Factory-made rigid fiberglass and flexible ducts for field-fabricated duct systems shall comply with UL
181.All pressure-sensitive tapes, mastics, aerosol sealants, or other closure systems used for installing
field-fabricated duct systems shall meet the applicable requirements of UL 181, UL 181A, and UL
i. Sealants shall comply with the applicable requirements of UL 181, UL 181A, and UL 181B, and
SECTION 120.4 – REQUIREMENTS FOR AIR DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM DUCTS AND PLENUMS
2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards Page 155
ii. Sealants for interior applications shall pass ASTM C731 (extrudability after aging) and D2202
(slump test on vertical surfaces), incorporated herein by reference.
iii. Sealants for exterior applications shall pass ASTM tests C731, C732 (artificial weathering test),
iv. Sealants and meshes shall be rated for exterior use.
C. Pressure-sensitive tape. Pressure-sensitive tapes shall comply with the applicable requirements of UL
D. Joints and seams of duct systems and their components shall not be sealed with cloth-back rubber
adhesive duct tapes unless such tape is used in combination with mastic and drawbands.
E. Drawbands used with flexible duct.
i. Drawbands shall be either stainless-steel worm-drive hose clamps or UV-resistant nylon duct ties.
ii. Drawbands shall have a minimum tensile strength rating of 150 pounds.
iii. Drawbands shall be tightened as recommended by the manufacturer with an adjustable tensioning
i. Aerosol sealants shall meet the requirements of UL 723 and be applied according to manufacturer
ii. Tapes or mastics used in combination with aerosol sealing shall meet the requirements of this
(c) All duct insulation product R-values shall be based on insulation only (excluding air films, vapor retarders, or
other duct components) and tested C-values at 75°F mean temperature at the installed thickness, in accordance
with ASTM C518 or ASTM C177, incorporated herein by reference, and certified pursuant to Section 110.8.
(d) The installed thickness of duct insulation used to determine its R-value shall be determined as follows:
1. For duct board, duct liner, and factory-made rigid ducts not normally subjected to compression, the nominal
2. For duct wrap, installed thickness shall be assumed to be 75 percent (25 percent compression) of nominal
3. For factory-made flexible air ducts, the installed thickness shall be determined by dividing the difference
between the actual outside diameter and nominal inside diameter by two.
(e) Insulated flexible duct products installed to meet this requirement must include labels, in maximum intervals of
3 feet, showing the thermal performance R-value for the duct insulation itself (excluding air films, vapor
retarder, or other duct components), based on the tests in Section 120.4(c) and the installed thickness determined
(f) Protection of Insulation. Insulation shall be protected from damage, including that due to sunlight, moisture,
equipment maintenance, and wind but not limited to the following: insulation exposed to weather shall be
suitable for outdoor service, e.g., protected by aluminum, sheet metal, painted canvas, or plastic cover. Cellular
foam insulation shall be protected as above or painted with a coating that is water retardant and provides
shielding from solar radiation that can cause degradation of the material.
SECTION 120.4 – REQUIREMENTS FOR AIR DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM DUCTS AND PLENUMS
Page 156 2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards
SECTION 120.5 – REQUIRED NONRESIDENTIAL MECHANICAL
Nonresidential, high-rise residential, and hotel/motel buildings shall comply with the applicable requirements of
EXCEPTION to Section 120.5: Systems serving healthcare facilities.
(a) Before an occupancy permit is granted the following equipment and systems shall be certified as meeting the
Acceptance Requirements for Code Compliance, as specified by the Reference Nonresidential Appendix NA7.
A Certificate of Acceptance shall be submitted to the enforcement agency that certifies that the equipment and
systems meet the acceptance requirements:
1. Outdoor air ventilation systems shall be tested in accordance with NA7.5.1
2. Constant volume, single zone air conditioning and heat pump unit controls shall be tested in accordance
3. Duct systems shall be tested in accordance with NA7.5.3 where either:
B. They are part of a system that meets the criteria of Section 141.0(b)2D.
4. Air economizers shall be tested in accordance with NA7.5.4.
EXCEPTION to Section 120.5(a)4: Air economizers installed by the HVAC system manufacturer and
certified to the Commission as being factory calibrated and tested are exempt from the Functional Testing
section of the Air Economizer Controls acceptance test as described in NA7.5.4.2.
5. Demand control ventilation systems required by Section 120.1(c)3 shall be tested in accordance with
6. Supply fan variable flow controls shall be tested in accordance with NA7.5.6
7. Hydronic system variable flow controls shall be tested in accordance with NA7.5.7 and NA7.5.9
8. Boiler or chillers that require isolation controls as specified by Section 140.4(k)2 or 140.4(k)3 shall be
9. Hydronic systems with supply water temperature reset controls shall be tested in accordance with NA7.5.8
10. Automatic demand shed controls shall be tested in accordance with NA7.5.10.
11. Fault Detection and Diagnostics (FDD) for Packaged Direct-Expansion Units shall be tested in accordance
12. Automatic Fault Detection and Diagnostics (FDD) for air-handling units and zone terminal units shall be
13. Distributed Energy Storage DX AC Systems shall be tested in accordance with NA7.5.13.
14. Thermal Energy Storage (TES) Systems shall be tested in accordance with NA7.5.14.
15. Supply air temperature reset controls shall be tested in accordance with NA7.5.15.
16.Water-cooled chillers served by cooling towers with condenser water reset controls shall be tested in
17.When an Energy Management Control System is installed, it shall functionally meet all of the applicable
18.Occupant Sensing Zone Controls shall be tested in accordance with NA7.5.17.
SECTION 120.5 – REQUIRED NONRESIDENTIAL MECHANICAL SYSTEM ACCEPTANCE
2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards Page 157
(b) When certification is required by Title 24, Part 1, Section 10-103.2, the acceptance testing specified by Section
120.5(a) shall be performed by a Certified Mechanical Acceptance Test Technician (CMATT). If the CMATT is
operating as an employee, the CMATT shall be employed by a Certified Mechanical Acceptance Test Employer.
The CMATT shall disclose on the Certificate of Acceptance a valid CMATT certification identification number
issued by an approved Acceptance Test Technician Certification Provider. The CMATT shall complete all
Certificate of Acceptance documentation in accordance with the applicable requirements in Section 10-103(a)4.
SECTION 120.5 – REQUIRED NONRESIDENTIAL MECHANICAL SYSTEM ACCEPTANCE
Page 158 2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards
SECTION 120.6 – MANDATORY REQUIREMENTS FOR COVERED
Nonresidential, high-rise residential, and hotel/motel buildings shall comply with the applicable requirements of
(a) Mandatory Requirements for Refrigerated Warehouses
Refrigerated Warehouses that are greater than or equal to 3,000 square feet and refrigerated spaces with a sum
total of 3,000 square feet or more that are served by the same refrigeration system shall meet the requirements of
Refrigerated Spaces that are less than 3,000 square feet shall meet the requirements of the Appliance Efficiency
Regulations for walk-in coolers or freezers contained in the Appliance Efficiency Regulations (California Code
1. Insulation Requirements. Exterior surfaces of refrigerated warehouses shall be insulated at least to the R-
TABLE 120.6-A REFRIGERATED WAREHOUSE INSULATION
SPACE SURFACE MINIMUM R-VALUE
Floor with all heating from productive R-20
1All underslab heating is provided by a heat exchanger that provides refrigerant subcooling or other means that result in
productive refrigeration capacity on the associated refrigerated system.
2. Underslab heating. Electric resistance heat shall not be used for the purposes of underslab heating.
EXCEPTION to Section 120.6(a)2: Underslab heating systems controlled such that the electric resistance
heat is thermostatically controlled and disabled during the summer on-peak period defined by the local
3. Evaporators. New fan-powered evaporators used in coolers and freezers shall conform to the following:
A. Single phase fan motors less than 1 hp and less than 460 Volts in newly installed evaporators shall be
electronically commutated motors or shall have a minimum motor efficiency of 70 percent when rated
in accordance with NEMA Standard MG 1-2006 at full load rating conditions.
B. Evaporator fans served either by a suction group with multiple compressors, or by a single compressor
with variable capacity capability shall be variable speed and the speed shall be controlled in response to
EXCEPTION 1 to Section 120.6(a)3B: Addition, alteration or replacement of less than all of the
evaporators in an existing refrigerated space that does not have speed-controlled evaporators.
EXCEPTION 2 to Section 120.6(a)3B: Coolers within refrigerated warehouses that maintain a
Controlled Atmosphere for which a licensed engineer has certified that the types of products stored will
require constant operation at 100 percent of the design airflow.
EXCEPTION 3 to Section 120.6(a)3B: Areas within refrigerated warehouses that are designed solely
for the purpose of quick chilling/freezing of products, including but not limited to spaces with design
cooling capacities of greater than 240 Btu/hr-ft² (2 tons per 100 ft²).
SECTION 120.6 – MANDATORY REQUIREMENTS FOR COVERED PROCESSES
2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards Page 159
C. Evaporator fans served by a single compressor that does not have variable capacity shall utilize controls
to reduce airflow by at least 40 percent for at least 75 percent of the time when the compressor is not
EXCEPTION to Section 120.6(a)3C: Areas within refrigerated warehouses that are designed solely
for the purpose of quick chilling/freezing of products (space with design cooling capacities of greater
4. Condensers. New fan-powered condensers on new refrigeration systems shall conform to the following:
A. Design saturated condensing temperatures for evaporative-cooled condensers and water-cooled
condensers served by fluid coolers or cooling towers shall be less than or equal to:
i. The design wetbulb temperature plus 20°F in locations where the design wetbulb temperature is
ii. The design wetbulb temperature plus 19°F in locations where the design wetbulb temperature is
iii. The design wetbulb temperature plus 18°F in locations were the design wetbulb temperature is
EXCEPTION 1 to Section 120.6(a)4A: Compressors and condensers on a refrigeration system for
which more than 20 percent of the total design refrigeration cooling load is for quick chilling or
freezing, or process refrigeration cooling for other than a refrigerated space.
B. Design saturated condensing temperatures for air-cooled condensers shall be less than or equal to:
i. The design drybulb temperature plus 10°F for systems serving freezers;
ii. The design drybulb temperature plus 15°F for systems serving coolers.
EXCEPTION 1 to Section 120.6(a)4B: Condensing units with a total compressor horsepower less
EXCEPTION 2 to Section 120.6(a)4B: Compressors and condensers on a refrigeration system for
which more than 20 percent of the total design refrigeration cooling load is for quick chilling or
freezing, or process refrigeration cooling for other than a refrigerated space.
C. The saturated condensing temperature necessary for adiabatic condensers to reject the design total heat
of rejection of a refrigeration system assuming dry mode performance shall be less than or equal to:
i. The design drybulb temperature plus 20°F for systems serving freezers;
ii. The design drybulb temperature plus 30°F for systems serving coolers.
EXCEPTION 1 to Section 120.6(a)4C: Compressors and condensers on a refrigeration system for
which more than 20 percent of the total design refrigeration cooling load is for quick chilling or
freezing, or process refrigeration cooling for other than a refrigerated space.
D. All condenser fans for air-cooled condensers, evaporative-cooled condensers, adiabatic condensers, gas
coolers, air or water fluid coolers or cooling towers shall be continuously variable speed, with the speed
of all fans serving a common condenser high side controlled in unison.
E. The minimum condensing temperature setpoint shall be less than or equal to 70°F for air-cooled
condensers, evaporative-cooled condensers, adiabatic condensers, gas coolers, air or water-cooled fluid
F. Condensing temperature reset. The condensing temperature set point of systems served by air-cooled
condensers shall be reset in response to ambient drybulb temperature. The condensing temperature set
point of systems served by evaporative-cooled condensers or water-cooled condensers (via cooling
towers or fluid coolers) shall be reset in response to ambient wetbulb temperatures. The condensing
temperature set point for systems served by adiabatic condensers shall be reset in response to ambient
drybulb temperature while operating in dry mode.
EXCEPTION 1 to Section 120.6(a)4F: Condensing temperature control strategies approved by the
Executive Director that have been demonstrated to provide at least equal energy savings.
SECTION 120.6 – MANDATORY REQUIREMENTS FOR COVERED PROCESSES
Page 160 2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards
EXCEPTION 2 to Section 120.6(a)4F: Systems served by adiabatic condensers in Climate Zones 1,
G. Fan-powered condensers shall meet the condenser efficiency requirements listed in TABLE 120.6-B.
Condenser efficiency is defined as the Total Heat of Rejection (THR) capacity divided by all electrical
input power including fan power at 100 percent fan speed, and power of spray pumps for evaporative
EXCEPTION to Section 120.6(a)4G: Adiabatic condensers with ammonia as refrigerant.
H. Air-cooled condensers shall have a fin density no greater than 10 fins per inch.
EXCEPTION to Section 120.6(a)4A, 4B, 4C, 4E, 4F and 4G: Transcritical CO refrigeration systems.
TABLE 120.6-B FAN-POWERED CONDENSERS – MINIMUM EFFICIENCY REQUIREMENTS
CONDENSER TYPE REFRIGERANT TYPE RATING CONDITION
Cooled with THR Capacity All 350 Btuh/Watt
Cooled with THR Capacity Wetbulb Temperature
Adiabatic Dry Mode Halocarbon 45 Btuh/W
Indoor Air-Cooled All Exempt
5. Compressors. Compressor systems utilized in refrigerated warehouses shall conform to the following:
A. Compressors shall be designed to operate at a minimum condensing temperature of 70°F or less.
B. New open-drive screw compressors in new refrigeration systems with a design saturated suction
temperature (SST) of 28°F or lower that discharges to the system condenser pressure shall control
compressor speed in response to the refrigeration load.
EXCEPTION 1 to Section 120.6(a)5B: Refrigeration plants with more than one dedicated compressor
EXCEPTION 2 to Section 120.6(a)5B: Compressors and condensers on a refrigeration system for
which more than 20 percent of the total design refrigeration cooling load is for quick chilling or
freezing, or process refrigeration cooling for other than a refrigerated space.
C. New screw compressors with nominal electric motor power greater than 150 HP shall include the
ability to automatically vary the compressor volume ratio (Vi) in response to operating pressures.
6. Infiltration Barriers. Passageways between freezers and higher-temperature spaces, and passageways
between coolers and nonrefrigerated spaces, shall have an infiltration barrier consisting of strip curtains, an
automatically-closing door, or an air curtain designed by the manufacturer for use in the passageway and
SECTION 120.6 – MANDATORY REQUIREMENTS FOR COVERED PROCESSES
2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards Page 161
EXCEPTION 1 to Section 120.6(a)6: Openings with less than 16 square feet of opening area.
EXCEPTION 2 to Section 120.6(a)6: Dock doorways for trailers.
7. Refrigeration System Acceptance. Before an occupancy permit is granted for a new refrigerated
warehouse, or before a new refrigeration system serving a refrigerated warehouse is operated for normal
use, the following equipment and systems shall be certified as meeting the Acceptance Requirements for
Code Compliance, as specified by the Reference Nonresidential Appendix NA7. A Certificate of
Acceptance shall be submitted to the enforcement agency that certifies that the equipment and systems meet
A. Electric resistance underslab heating systems shall be tested in accordance with NA7.10.1.
B. Evaporators fan motor controls shall be tested in accordance with NA7.10.2.
C. Evaporative condensers shall be tested in accordance with NA7.10.3.1.
D. Air-cooled condensers shall be tested in accordance with NA7.10.3.2.
E. Adiabatic condensers shall be tested in accordance with NA7.10.3.3.
F. Variable speed compressors shall be tested in accordance with NA7.10.4.
(b) Mandatory Requirements for Commercial Refrigeration.
Retail food stores with 8,000 square feet or more of conditioned floor area, and that utilize either refrigerated
display cases, or walk-in coolers or freezers, shall meet all applicable State and federal appliance and equipment
standards consistent with Section 110.0 and 110.1 or, for equipment not subject to such standards, the
1. Condensers serving refrigeration systems. Fan-powered condensers shall conform to the following
A. All condenser fans for air-cooled condensers, evaporative-cooled condensers, adiabatic condensers, gas
coolers, air- or water-cooled fluid coolers or cooling towers shall be continuously variable speed, with
the speed of all fans serving a common condenser high side controlled in unison.
B. The refrigeration system condenser controls for systems with air-cooled condensers shall use variable-
setpoint control logic to reset the condensing temperature setpoint in response to ambient drybulb
C. The refrigeration system condenser controls for systems with evaporative-cooled condensers shall use
variable-setpoint control logic to reset the condensing temperature setpoint in response to ambient
D. The refrigeration system condenser controls for systems with adiabatic condensers shall use variable
setpoint control logic to reset the condensing temperature setpoint in response to ambient drybulb
temperature while operating in dry mode.
EXCEPTION 1 to Section 120.6(b)1B, C and D: Condensing temperature control strategies approved by
the executive director that have been demonstrated to provide equal energy savings.
EXCEPTION 2 to Section 120.6(b)1D: Systems served by adiabatic condensers in Climate Zone 16.
E. The saturated condensing temperature necessary for adiabatic condensers to reject the design total heat
of rejection of a refrigeration system assuming dry mode performance shall be less than or equal to:
i. The design drybulb temperature plus 20°F for systems serving freezers;
ii. The design drybulb temperature plus 30°F for systems serving coolers.
F. The minimum condensing temperature setpoint shall be less than or equal to 70°F.
G. Fan-powered condensers shall meet the specific efficiency requirements listed in Table 120.6-C.
SECTION 120.6 – MANDATORY REQUIREMENTS FOR COVERED PROCESSES
Page 162 2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards
TABLE 120.6-C FAN-POWERED CONDENSERS –SPECIFIC EFFICIENCY REQUIREMENTS
CONDENSER TYPE MINIMUM SPECIFIC EFFICIENCYa RATING CONDITION
aSee Section 100.1 for definition of condenser specific efficiency.
EXCEPTION 1 to Section 120.6(b)1G: Condensers with a Total Heat Rejection capacity of less than
150,000 Btuh at the specific efficiency rating condition.
EXCEPTION 2 to Section 120.6(b)1G: Stores located in Climate Zone 1.
EXCEPTION 3 to Section 120.6(b)1G: Existing condensers that are reused for an addition or
H. Air-cooled condensers shall have a fin density no greater than 10 fins per inch.
EXCEPTION 2 to Section 120.6(b)1H: Existing condensers that are reused for an addition or
EXCEPTION to Section 120.6(b)1B, 1C, 1D, 1E, 1F, 1G: Transcritical CO2 refrigeration systems.
EXCEPTION to Section 120.6(b)1: New condensers replacing existing condensers when the attached
compressor system Total Heat of Rejection does not increase and less than 25 percent of both the attached
compressors and the attached display cases are new.
2. Compressor Systems. Refrigeration compressor systems and condensing units shall conform to the
A. Compressors and multiple-compressor suction groups shall include control systems that use floating
suction pressure logic to reset the target saturated suction temperature based on the temperature
requirements of the attached refrigeration display cases or walk-ins.
EXCEPTION 1 to Section 120.6(b)2A: Single compressor systems that do not have continuously
EXCEPTION 2 to Section 120.6(b)2A: Suction groups that have a design saturated suction
temperature of 30°F or higher, or suction groups that comprise the high stage of a two-stage or cascade
system or that primarily serve chillers for secondary cooling fluids.
B. Liquid subcooling shall be provided for all low temperature compressor systems with a design cooling
capacity equal or greater than 100,000 Btu/hr with a design saturated suction temperature of -10°F or
lower, with the subcooled liquid temperature maintained continuously at 50°F or less at the exit of the
subcooler, using compressor economizer port(s) or a separate medium or high temperature suction
group operating at a saturated suction temperature of 18°F or higher.
EXCEPTION to Section 120.6(b)2B: Low temperature cascade systems that condense into another
refrigeration system rather than condensing to ambient temperature.
EXCEPTION to Section 120.6(b)2: Existing compressor systems that are reused for an addition or
3. Refrigerated Display Cases. Lighting in refrigerated display cases, and lights on glass doors installed on
walk-in coolers and freezers shall be controlled by one of the following:
SECTION 120.6 – MANDATORY REQUIREMENTS FOR COVERED PROCESSES
2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards Page 163
A. Automatic time switch controls to turn off lights during nonbusiness hours. Timed overrides for any
line-up or walk-in case may only be used to turn the lights on for up to one hour. Manual overrides
shall time-out automatically to turn the lights off after one hour.
B. Motion sensor controls on each case that reduce display case lighting power by at least 50 percent
within 30 minutes after the area near the case is vacated.
A. HVAC systems shall utilize heat recovery from refrigeration system(s) for space heating, using no less
than 25 percent of the sum of the design Total Heat of Rejection of all refrigeration systems that have
individual Total Heat of Rejection values of 150,000 Btu/h or greater at design conditions.
EXCEPTION 1 to Section 120.6(b)4A: Stores located in Climate Zone 15.
EXCEPTION 2 to Section 120.6(b)4A: HVAC systems or refrigeration systems that are reused for an
B. The increase in hydrofluorocarbon refrigerant charge associated with refrigeration heat recovery
equipment and piping shall be no greater than 0.35 lbs per 1,000 Btu/h of heat recovery heating
(c) Mandatory Requirements for Enclosed Parking Garages. Mechanical ventilation systems for enclosed
parking garages where the total design exhaust rate for the garage is greater than or equal to 10,000 cfm shall
1. Automatically detect contaminant levels and stage fans or modulate fan airflow rates to 50 percent or less of
design capacity provided acceptable contaminant levels are maintained.
2. Have controls and/or devices that will result in fan motor demand of no more than 30 percent of design
3. CO shall be monitored with at least one sensor per 5,000 square feet, with the sensor located in the highest
expected concentration locations, with at least two sensors per proximity zone. A proximity zone is defined
as an area that is isolated from other areas either by floor or other impenetrable obstruction.
4. CO concentration at all sensors is maintained at 25 ppm or less at all times.
5. The ventilation rate shall be at least 0.15 cfm/ft2 when the garage is scheduled to be occupied.
6. The system shall maintain the garage at negative or neutral pressure relative to other occupiable spaces
when the garage is scheduled to be occupied.
A. Certified by the manufacturer to be accurate within plus or minus 5 percent of measurement.
C. Certified by the manufacturer to drift no more than 5 percent per year.
D. Certified by the manufacturer to require calibration no more frequently than once a year.
E. Monitored by a control system. The system shall have logic that automatically checks for sensor failure
by the following means. Upon detection of a failure, the system shall reset to design ventilation rates
and transmit an alarm to the facility operators.
i. If any sensor has not been calibrated according to the manufacturer’s recommendations within the
specified calibration period, the sensor has failed.
ii. During unoccupied periods the system compares the readings of all sensors, e.g., if any sensor is
more than 15 ppm above or below the average of all sensors for longer than four hours, the sensor
iii. During occupied periods the system compares the readings of sensors in the same proximity zone,
e.g., if the 30 minute rolling average for any sensor in a proximity zone is more than 15 ppm above
or below the 30 minute rolling average for other sensor(s) in that proximity zone, the sensor has
SECTION 120.6 – MANDATORY REQUIREMENTS FOR COVERED PROCESSES
Page 164 2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards
8. Parking Garage Ventilation System Acceptance. Before an occupancy permit is granted for a parking
garage system subject to Section 120.6(c), the following equipment and systems shall be certified as
meeting the Acceptance Requirements for Code Compliance, as specified by the Reference Nonresidential
Appendix NA7. A Certificate of Acceptance shall be submitted to the enforcement agency that certifies that
the equipment and systems meet the acceptance requirements specified in NA7.12.
EXCEPTION 1 to Section 120.6(c): Any garage, or portion of a garage, where more than 20 percent of the
vehicles expected to be stored have non-gasoline combustion engines.
EXCEPTION 2 to Section 120.6(c): Additions and alterations to existing garages where less than 10,000 cfm
of new exhaust capacity is being added.
(d) Mandatory Requirements for Process Boilers
1. Combustion air positive shut-off shall be provided on all newly installed process boilers as follows:
A. All process boilers with an input capacity of 2.5 MMBtu/h (2,500,000 Btu/h) and above, in which the
boiler is designed to operate with a non-positive vent static pressure.
B. All process boilers where one stack serves two or more boilers with a total combined input capacity per
2. Process boiler combustion air fans with motors 10 horsepower or larger shall meet one of the following for
A. The fan motor shall be driven by a variable speed drive; or
B. The fan motor shall include controls that limit the fan motor demand to no more than 30 percent of the
total design wattage at 50 percent of design air volume.
3. Newly installed process boilers with an input capacity of 5 MMBtu/h (5,000,000 Btu/h) to 10 MMBtu/h
(10,000,000 Btu/h) shall maintain excess (stack-gas) oxygen concentrations at less than or equal to 5.0
percent by volume on a dry basis over firing rates of 20 percent to 100 percent. Combustion air volume
shall be controlled with respect to firing rate or measured flue gas oxygen concentration. Use of a common
gas and combustion air control linkage or jack shaft is prohibited.
4. Newly installed process boilers with an input capacity greater than 10 MMBtu/h (10,000,000 Btu/h) shall
maintain excess (stack-gas) oxygen concentrations at less than or equal to 3.0 percent by volume on a dry
basis over firing rates of 20 to 100 percent. Combustion air volume shall be controlled with respect to
measured flue gas oxygen concentration. Use of a common gas and combustion air control linkage or jack
(e) Mandatory Requirements for Compressed Air Systems. All new compressed air systems, and all additions or
alterations of compressed air systems where the total combined online horsepower (hp) of the compressor(s) is
25 horsepower or more shall meet the requirements of Subsections 1 through 3. These requirements apply to the
compressors and related controls that provide compressed air and do not apply to any equipment or controls that
use or process the compressed air.
EXCEPTION 1 to Section 120.6(e): Alterations of existing compressed air systems that include one or more
EXCEPTION 2 to Section 120.6(e): Compressed Air Systems, including medical gas, serving healthcare
1. Trim Compressor and Storage. The compressed air system shall be equipped with an appropriately sized
trim compressor and primary storage to provide acceptable performance across the range of the system and
to avoid control gaps. The compressed air system shall comply with Subsection A or B below:
A. The compressed air system shall include one or more variable speed drive (VSD) compressors. For
systems with more than one compressor, the total combined capacity of the VSD compressor(s) acting
as trim compressors must be at least 1.25 times the largest net capacity increment between
combinations of compressors. The compressed air system shall include primary storage of at least one
gallon per actual cubic feet per minute (acfm) of the largest trim compressor; or,
B. The compressed air system shall include a compressor or set of compressors with total effective trim
capacity at least the size of the largest net capacity increment between combinations of compressors, or
SECTION 120.6 – MANDATORY REQUIREMENTS FOR COVERED PROCESSES
2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards Page 165
the size of the smallest compressor, whichever is larger. The total effective trim capacity of single
compressor systems shall cover at least the range from 70 percent to 100 percent of rated capacity. The
effective trim capacity of a compressor is the size of the continuous operational range where the
specific power of the compressor (kW/100 acfm) is within 15 percent of the specific power at its most
efficient operating point. The total effective trim capacity of the system is the sum of the effective trim
capacity of the trim compressors. The system shall include primary storage of at least 2 gallons per
acfm of the largest trim compressor.
EXCEPTION 1 to Section 120.6(e)1: Compressed air systems in existing facilities that are adding or
replacing less than 50 percent of the online capacity of the system.
EXCEPTION 2 to Section 120.6(e)1: Compressed air systems that have been approved by the Energy
Commission Executive Director as having demonstrated that the system serves loads for which typical air
demand fluctuates less than 10 percent.
2. Controls. Compressed air systems with more than one compressor online, having a combined horsepower
rating of more than 100 hp, must operate with a controller that is able to choose the most energy efficient
combination of compressors within the system based on the current air demand as measured by a sensor.
3. Compressed Air System Acceptance. Before an occupancy permit is granted for a compressed air system
subject to Section 120.6(e), the following equipment and systems shall be certified as meeting the
Acceptance Requirements for Code Compliance, as specified by the Reference Nonresidential Appendix
NA7. A Certificate of Acceptance shall be submitted to the enforcement agency that certifies that the
equipment and systems meet the acceptance requirements specified in NA 7.13.
(f) Mandatory Requirements for Elevators. Elevators shall meet the following requirements:
1. The light power density for the luminaires inside the elevator cab shall be no greater than 0.6 watts per
EXCEPTION to Section 120.6(f)1: Interior signal lighting and interior display lighting are not included in
the calculation of lighting power density.
2. Elevator cab ventilation fans for cabs without space conditioning shall not exceed 0.33 watts per CFM as
3. When the elevator cab is stopped and unoccupied with doors closed for over 15 minutes, the cab interior
lighting and ventilation fans shall be switched off until elevator cab operation resumes.
4. Lighting and ventilation shall remain operational in the event that the elevator cabin gets stuck when
5. Elevator Lighting and Ventilation Control Acceptance. Before an occupancy permit is granted for elevators
subject to 120.6(f), the following equipment and systems shall be certified as meeting the Acceptance
Requirement for Code Compliance, as specified by the Reference Nonresidential Appendix NA7. A
Certificate of Acceptance shall be submitted to the enforcement agency that certifies that the equipment and
systems meet the acceptance requirements specified in NA7.14.
EXCEPTION to Section 120.6(f): Elevators located in healthcare facilities.
(g) Mandatory Requirements for Escalators and Moving Walkways
1. Escalators and moving walkways located in airports, hotels, and transportation function areas shall
automatically slow to the minimum permitted speed in accordance with ASME A17.1/CSA B44 when not
2. Escalators and Moving Walkways Acceptance. Before an occupancy permit is granted for escalators and
moving walkways subject to 120.6(g), the following equipment and systems shall be certified as meeting
the Acceptance Requirement for Code Compliance, as specified by the Reference Nonresidential Appendix
NA7. A Certificate of Acceptance shall be submitted to the enforcement agency that certifies that the
equipment and systems meet the acceptance requirements specified in NA7.15.
SECTION 120.6 – MANDATORY REQUIREMENTS FOR COVERED PROCESSES
Page 166 2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards
SECTION 120.7 – MANDATORY INSULATION REQUIREMENTS
Nonresidential, high-rise residential, and hotel/motel buildings shall comply with the applicable requirements in
(a) Roof/Ceiling Insulation. The opaque portions of the roof/ceiling that separates conditioned spaces from
unconditioned spaces or ambient air shall meet the applicable requirements of Items 1 through 3 below:
1. Metal Building- The weighted average U-factor of the roof assembly shall not exceed 0.098.
2. Wood Framed and Others- The weighted average U-factor of the roof assembly shall not exceed 0.075.
3. Insulation Placement- Insulation installed to limit heat loss and gain from conditioned spaces to
unconditioned spaces shall comply with all of the following:
A. Insulation shall be installed in direct contact with a continuous roof or ceiling that is sealed to limit
infiltration and exfiltration as specified in Section 110.7. This may include, but is not limited to, placing
insulation either above or below the roof deck or on top of the finished ceiling.
B. When insulation is installed at the roof in nonresidential buildings, fixed vents or openings to the
outdoors or to unconditioned spaces shall not be installed. When the space between the ceiling and the
roof is either directly or indirectly conditioned space, it shall not be considered an attic for the purposes
of complying with CBC attic ventilation requirements.
C. Insulation placed on top of a suspended ceiling with removable ceiling panels shall not be used to meet
the Roof/Ceiling requirement of Sections 140.3 and 141.0.
EXCEPTION to Section 120.7(a)3: When there are conditioned spaces with a combined floor area no
greater than 2,000 square feet in an otherwise unconditioned building, and when the average height of
the space between the ceiling and the roof over these spaces is greater than 12 feet, insulation placed in
direct contact with a suspended ceiling with removable ceiling panels shall be an acceptable method of
reducing heat loss from a conditioned space and shall be accounted for in heat loss calculations.
NOTE: Vents that do not penetrate the roof deck and are instead designed for wind resistance for roof
membranes are not within the scope of Section 120.7(a)3B.
(b) Wall Insulation. The opaque portions of walls that separate conditioned spaces from unconditioned spaces or
ambient air shall meet the applicable requirements of Items 1 through 7 below:
1. Metal Building. The weighted average U-factor of the wall assembly shall not exceed 0.113.
2. Metal Framed. The weighted average U-factor of the wall assembly shall not exceed 0.151.
3. Light Mass Walls. A 6 inch or greater Hollow Core Concrete Masonry Unit shall have a U-factor not to
4. Heavy Mass Walls. An 8 inch or greater Hollow Core Concrete Masonry Unit shall have a U-factor not to
5. Wood Framed and Others. The weighted average U-factor of the wall assembly shall not exceed 0.110.
6. Spandrel Panels and Curtain Wall. The weighted average U-factor of the spandrel panels and curtain wall
assembly shall not exceed 0.280.
7. Demising Walls. The opaque portions of framed demising walls shall meet the requirements of Item A or
A. Wood framed walls shall be insulated to meet a U-factor not greater than 0.099.
B. Metal Framed walls shall be insulated to meet a U-factor not greater than 0.151.
(c) Floor and Soffit Insulation. The opaque portions of floors and soffits that separate conditioned spaces from
unconditioned spaces or ambient air shall meet the applicable requirements of Items 1 and 2 below:
1. Raised Mass Floors. Shall have a minimum of 3 inches of lightweight concrete over a metal deck or the
weighted average U-factor of the floor assembly shall not exceed 0.269.
2. Other Floors. The weighted average U-factor of the floor assembly shall not exceed 0.071.
SECTION 120.7 – MANDATORY INSULATION REQUIREMENTS
2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards Page 167
3. Heated Slab On Grade Floor. A heated slab on grade floor shall be insulated to meet the requirements of
EXCEPTION to Section 120.7: A dedicated building used solely as a data center that has a total covered process
SECTION 120.7 – MANDATORY INSULATION REQUIREMENTS
Page 168 2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards
SECTION 120.8 – NONRESIDENTIAL BUILDING COMMISSIONING
Nonresidential buildings other than healthcare facilities, with conditioned space of 10,000 square feet or more, shall
comply with the applicable requirements of Sections 120.8(a) through 120.8(i) in the building design and
construction processes. All building systems and components covered by Sections 110.0, 120.0, 130.0, and 140.0
shall be included in the scope of the commissioning requirements in this Section, excluding those related solely to
Nonresidential buildings other than healthcare facilities, with conditioned space of less than 10,000 square feet, shall
comply with the design review requirements specified in Sections 120.8(d) and shall include any measures or
requirements necessary for completing this review in the construction documents in a manner consistent with Section
Healthcare facilities shall instead comply with the applicable requirements of Chapter 7 of the California
NOTE: Nonresidential buildings include nonresidential spaces such as nonresidential function areas within
hotel/motel and high-rise residential buildings. The requirements of Section 120.8 apply based on the square footage
The commissioning described in this Section is in addition to any commissioning required by Title 24, Part 11,
(a) Summary of Commissioning Requirements. Commissioning shall include completion of the following items:
4. Commissioning measures shown in the construction documents;
(b) Owner’s or Owner Representative’s Project Requirements (OPR). The energy-related expectations and
requirements of the building shall be documented before the design phase of the project begins. This
documentation shall include the following:
3. Project documentation requirements, including facility functions and hours of operation, and need for after
4. Equipment and systems expectations; and
(c) Basis of Design (BOD). A written explanation of how the design of the building systems and components meets
the OPR shall be completed at the design phase of the building project, and updated as necessary during the
design and construction phases. The Basis of Design document shall cover the following systems and
1. Heating, ventilation, air conditioning (HVAC) systems and controls;
2. Indoor lighting system and controls;
3. Water heating systems and controls; and
4. Any building envelope component considered in the OPR.
SECTION 120.8 – NONRESIDENTIAL BUILDING COMMISSIONING
2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards Page 169
1. Design Reviewer Requirements. The design reviewer shall be the signer of the Design Review Kickoff
Certificate(s) of Compliance and Construction Document Design Review Checklist Certificate(s) of
Compliance as specified in Part 1 Section 10-103(a)1.
2. Design Review Kickoff. During the schematic design phase of the building project, the owner or owner’s
representative, design team and design reviewer must meet to discuss the project scope, schedule and how
the design reviewer will coordinate with the project team. The building owner or owner's representative
shall include the Design Review Kickoff Certificate of Compliance form in the Certificate of Compliance
documentation as specified in Part 1 Section 10-103.
3. Construction Documents Design Review. The Construction Document Design Review Checklist
Certificate of Compliance shall list the items checked by the design reviewer during the construction
document review. The completed form shall be returned to the owner and design team for review and sign-
off. The building owner or owner's representative shall include this form in the Certificate of Compliance
documentation as specified in Part 1 Section 10-103.
(e) Commissioning measures shown in the construction documents. Complete descriptions of all measures or
requirements necessary for commissioning shall be included in the construction documents (plans and
specifications). Commissioning measures or requirements shall be clear, detailed and complete to clarify the
(f) Commissioning Plan. Prior to permit issuance a commissioning plan shall be completed to document how the
project will be commissioned and shall be started during the design phase of the building project. The
Commissioning Plan shall include the following:
4. Plans to test systems and components, which shall include:
A. An explanation of the original design intent; and
B. Equipment and systems to be tested, including the extent of tests; and
D. Conditions under which the test shall be performed; and
E. Measurable criteria for acceptable performance; and
G. Commissioning process activities, schedules and responsibilities. Plans for the completion of
commissioning requirements listed in Sections 120.8(g) through 120.8(i) shall be included.
(g) Functional performance testing. Functional performance tests shall demonstrate the correct installation and
operation of each component, system and system-to-system interface in accordance with the acceptance test
requirements in Sections 120.5, 130.4 and 140.9. Functional performance testing reports shall contain
information addressing each of the building components tested, the testing methods utilized, and include any
(h) Documentation and training. A Systems Manual and Systems Operations Training shall be completed.
1. Systems manual. Documentation of the operational aspects of the building shall be completed within the
Systems Manual and delivered to the building owner or representative and facilities operator. The Systems
Manual shall include the following:
A. Site information, including facility description, history and current requirements; and
SECTION 120.8 – NONRESIDENTIAL BUILDING COMMISSIONING
Page 170 2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards
C. Instructions for basic operations and maintenance, including general site operating procedures, basic
troubleshooting, recommended maintenance requirements, and a site events log; and
E. Site equipment inventory and maintenance notes; and
F. A copy of all special inspection verifications required by the enforcing agency or the Standards.
2. Systems operations training. The training of the appropriate maintenance staff for each equipment type or
system shall be documented in the commissioning report. Training materials shall include the following:
A. System and equipment overview (i.e., what the equipment is, what it does and with what other systems
B. Review and demonstration of operation, servicing and preventive maintenance procedures
C. Review of the information in the Systems Manual
D. Review of the record drawings on the systems and equipment
(i) Commissioning report. A complete report of commissioning process activities undertaken through the design,
construction and reporting recommendations for post-construction phases of the building project shall be
completed and provided to the owner or owner’s representative.
SECTION 120.8 – NONRESIDENTIAL BUILDING COMMISSIONING
2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards Page 171
SECTION 120.9 – MANDATORY REQUIREMENTS FOR COMMERCIAL
(a) Combustion air positive shut-off shall be provided on all newly installed boilers as follows:
1. All boilers with an input capacity of 2.5 MMBtu/h (2,500,000 Btu/h) and above, in which the boiler is
designed to operate with a nonpositive vent static pressure.
2. All boilers where one stack serves two or more boilers with a total combined input capacity per stack of 2.5
(b) Boiler combustion air fans with motors 10 horsepower or larger shall meet one of the following for newly
1. The fan motor shall be driven by a variable speed drive, or
2. The fan motor shall include controls that limit the fan motor demand to no more than 30 percent of the total
design wattage at 50 percent of design air volume.
(c) Newly installed boilers with an input capacity 5 MMBtu/h (5,000,000 Btu/h) and greater shall maintain excess
(stack-gas) oxygen concentrations at less than or equal to 5.0 percent by volume on a dry basis over firing rates
of 20 to 100 percent. Combustion air volume shall be controlled with respect to firing rate or flue gas oxygen
concentration. Use of a common gas and combustion air control linkage or jack shaft is prohibited.
EXCEPTION to Section 120.9(c): Boilers with steady state full-load thermal efficiency 85 percent or higher.
SECTION 120.9 – MANDATORY REQUIREMENTS FOR COMMERCIAL BOILERS.
Page 172 2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards
SECTION 120.9 – MANDATORY REQUIREMENTS FOR COMMERCIAL BOILERS.
2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards Page 173
REQUIREMENTS FOR LIGHTING SYSTEMS AND
SECTION 130.0 – LIGHTING SYSTEMS AND EQUIPMENT, AND
ELECTRICAL POWER DISTRIBUTION SYSTEMS —GENERAL
(a) The design and installation of all lighting systems and equipment in nonresidential, high-rise residential,
hotel/motel buildings, outdoor lighting, and electrical power distribution systems within the scope of Section
100.0(a) shall comply with the applicable provisions of Sections 130.0 through 130.5.
NOTE: The requirements of Sections 130.0 through 130.5 apply to newly constructed buildings. Section 141.0
specifies which requirements of Sections 130.0 through 130.5 also apply to additions and alterations to existing
(b) Functional areas where compliance with the residential lighting standards is required. The design and
installation of all lighting systems, lighting controls, and equipment in the following functional areas shall
comply with the applicable residential lighting requirements of Section 150.0(k). In buildings containing these
functional areas, all other functional areas, such as common areas, shall comply with the applicable
nonresidential lighting and controlled receptacle requirements.
2. Outdoor lighting attached to a high-rise residential or hotel/motel building and separately controlled from
the inside of a dwelling unit or guest room.
4. Hotel and motel guest rooms. Additionally, hotel and motel guest rooms shall meet the requirements of
5. Dormitory and Senior housing dwelling accommodations.
NOTE: The requirements of Section 130.0(b) also apply to additions and alterations to functional areas of
existing buildings as specified in Section 130.0(b).
(c) Luminaire classification and power. Luminaires shall be classified and their wattage shall be determined as
1. Luminaire wattage shall be labeled as follows:
A. The maximum rated wattage or relamping rated wattage of a luminaire shall be listed on a permanent,
B. The factory-installed maximum rated wattage or relamping rated wattage label shall not consist of peel-
off or peel-down layers or other methods that allow the rated wattage to be changed after the luminaire
has been shipped from the manufacturer.
EXCEPTION to Section 130.0(c)1B: Peel-down labels may be used only for the following luminaires
when they can accommodate a range of lamp wattages without changing the luminaire housing, ballast,
transformer or wiring. Qualifying luminaires shall have a single lamp, and shall have integrated
SECTION 130.0 – LIGHTING SYSTEMS AND EQUIPMENT, AND ELECTRICAL POWER DISTRIBUTION
Page 174 2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards
ballasts or transformers. Peel-down labels must be layered such that the rated wattage reduces as
i. High intensity discharge luminaires, having an integral electronic ballast, with a maximum
ii. Low-voltage luminaires (except low voltage track systems), ≤ 24 volts, with a maximum relamping
iii. Compact fluorescent luminaires, having an integral electronic ballast, with a maximum relamping
2. For luminaires with line voltage lamp holders not containing permanently installed ballasts or transformers,
the wattage of such luminaires shall be determined as follows:
A. The maximum rated wattage of the luminaire; and
B. For recessed luminaires with line-voltage medium screw base sockets, wattage shall not be less than 50
watts per socket, or the rated wattage of the installed JA8 compliant lamps.
3. For luminaires with permanently installed or remotely installed ballasts, the wattage of such luminaires shall
be the operating input wattage of the rated lamp/ballast combination published in the ballast manufacturer’s
catalogs based on independent testing lab reports as specified by UL 1598.
4. For inseparable SSL luminaires and SSL luminaires with remotely mounted drivers, the maximum rated
wattage shall be the maximum rated input wattage of the SSL luminaire as specified in Section 130.0(c)1
5. For LED tape lighting and LED linear lighting with LED tape lighting components, the maximum rated
wattage shall be the sum of the installed length of the tape lighting times its rated linear power density in
watts per linear feet, or the maximum rated input wattage of the driver or power supply providing power to
the lighting system, with tape lighting tested in accordance with UL 2108, 8750, or IES LM-79.
6. For modular lighting systems that allow the addition or relocation of luminaires without altering the wiring
A. The wattage shall be the greater of:
i. 30 watts per linear foot of track or plug-in busway; or
ii. the rated wattage of all of the luminaires included in the system, where the luminaire wattage is
B. For line-voltage lighting track and plug-in busway served by a track lighting integral current limiter or
a dedicated track lighting supplementary overcurrent protection panel, the wattage shall be determined
i. The volt-ampere rating of the current limiter as specified by UL 1077;
ii. The sum of the ampere (A) rating of all of the current protection devices times the branch circuit
voltages for track lighting supplementary overcurrent protection panel ; or
C. For other modular lighting systems with power supplied by a driver, power supply or transformer,
including but not limited to low-voltage lighting systems, the wattage of the system shall be the
maximum rated input wattage of the driver, power supply or transformer published in the
EXCEPTION to Section 130.0(c)6: For power-over-Ethernet lighting systems, power provided to installed
non-lighting devices may be subtracted from the total power rating of the power-over-Ethernet system.
7. For all other lighting equipment not addressed by Sections 130.0(c)2 through 6, the wattage of the lighting
equipment shall be the maximum rated wattage of the lighting equipment, or operating input wattage of the
system, labeled in accordance with Section 130.0(c)1, or published in manufacturer’s catalogs, based on
SECTION 130.0 – LIGHTING SYSTEMS AND EQUIPMENT, AND ELECTRICAL POWER DISTRIBUTION
2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards Page 175
(d) Lighting Controls. All lighting controls and equipment shall comply with the applicable requirements in
Sections 110.9, 130.1 and 130.2, and shall be installed in accordance with any applicable manufacturer
(e) Energy Management Control System (EMCS). An EMCS may be installed to comply with the requirements
of one or more lighting controls if it meets the following minimum requirements:
1. Provides all applicable functionality for each specific lighting control or system for which it is installed in
2. Complies with all applicable Lighting Control Installation Requirements in accordance with Section 130.4
for each specific lighting control or system for which it is installed; and
3. Complies with all applicable application requirements for each specific lighting control or system for which
SECTION 130.0 – LIGHTING SYSTEMS AND EQUIPMENT, AND ELECTRICAL POWER DISTRIBUTION
2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards Page 177
SECTION 130.1 – MANDATORY INDOOR LIGHTING CONTROLS
Nonresidential, high-rise residential, and hotel/motel buildings shall comply with the applicable requirements of
Sections 130.1(a) through 130.1(f), in addition to the applicable requirements of Sections 110.9 and 130.0.
(a) Manual Area Controls. Each area enclosed by ceiling-height partitions shall provide lighting controls that
allow the lighting in that area to be manually turned on and off. The manual control shall:
EXCEPTION to Section 130.1(a)1: Public restrooms having two or more stalls, parking areas, stairwells,
and corridors may use a manual control not accessible to unauthorized personnel.
2. Be located in the same enclosed area with the lighting it controls; and
EXCEPTION 1 to Section 130.1(a)2: For malls and atria, auditorium areas, retail merchandise sales areas,
wholesale showroom areas, commercial and industrial storage areas, general commercial and industrial
work areas, convention centers, arenas, psychiatric and secure areas in healthcare facilities, and other areas
where placement of a manual area control poses a health and safety hazard, the manual area control may
instead be located so that a person using the control can see the lights or area controlled by that control, or
visually signal or display the current state of the controlled lighting.
EXCEPTION 2 to Section 130.1(a)2: In healthcare facilities, for restrooms and bathing rooms intended
for a single occupant, the lighting control may be located outside the enclosed area but directly adjacent to
3. Provide separate control of general, floor display, wall display, window display, case display, ornamental,
and special effects lighting, such that each type of lighting can be turned on or off without turning on or off
other types of lighting, and without turning on or off any other equipment.
EXCEPTION to Section 130.1(a): Up to 0.2 watts per square foot of indoor lighting may be continuously
illuminated to allow for means of egress illumination consistent with California Building Code Section 1008.
Egress lighting complying with this wattage limitation is not required to comply with manual area control
1. The area is designated for means of egress on the plans and specifications submitted to the enforcement
agency under Section 10-103(a)2 of Part 1; and
2. The controls for the egress lighting are not accessible to unauthorized personnel.
(b) Multilevel Lighting Controls. The general lighting of any enclosed area 100 square feet or larger with a
connected lighting load that exceeds 0.5 watts per square foot shall provide multilevel lighting controls that
allow the level of lighting to be adjusted up and down. The multilevel controls shall provide the number of
control steps and meet the uniformity requirements specified in TABLE 130.1-A.
EXCEPTION 1 to Section 130.1(b): An area enclosed by ceiling height partitions that has only one luminaire
with no more than two lamps.
(c) Shut-OFF Controls. All installed indoor lighting shall be equipped with controls able to automatically reduce
lighting power when the space is typically unoccupied.
1. In addition to lighting controls installed to comply with Sections 130.1(a) and (b), all installed indoor
lighting shall be equipped with controls that meet the following requirements:
A. Shall be controlled with an occupant sensing control, automatic time-switch control, or other control
capable of automatically shutting OFF all of the lighting when the space is typically unoccupied; and
B. Separate controls for the lighting on each floor, other than lighting in stairwells; and
SECTION 130.1 – MANDATORY INDOOR LIGHTING CONTROLS
Page 178 2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards
C. Separate controls for a space enclosed by ceiling height partitions not exceeding 5,000 square feet; and
EXCEPTION to Section 130.1(c)1C: In the following function areas the area controlled may not
exceed 20,000 square feet: Malls, auditoriums, single tenant retail, industrial, convention centers, and
D. Separate controls for general, display, ornamental, and display case lighting; and
E. For automatic time-switch controls, may include a manual-on mode.
EXCEPTION 1 to Section 130.1(c)1: Where the lighting is serving an area that is in continuous use, 24
hours per day/365 days per year.
EXCEPTION 2 to Section 130.1(c)1: Lighting complying with Section 130.1(c)5 or 7.
EXCEPTION 3 to Section 130.1(c)1: Up to 0.1 watts per square foot of lighting in any area within a
building may be continuously illuminated, provided that the area is designated for means of egress on the
plans and specifications submitted to the enforcement agency under Section 10-103(a)2 of Part 1.
EXCEPTION 4 to Section 130.1(c)1: Electrical equipment rooms subject to Article 110.26(D) of the
EXCEPTION 5 to Section 130.1(c)1: Illumination provided by lighting equipment that is designated for
emergency lighting, connected to an emergency power source or battery supply, and is intended to function
in emergency mode only when normal power is absent.
2. Countdown timer switches may be used to comply with the automatic shut-OFF control requirements in
Section 130.1(c)1 only in closets less than 70 square feet, and server aisles in server rooms. The maximum
timer setting shall be 10 minutes for closets, and 30 minutes for server aisles.
3. If an automatic time-switch control, other than an occupant sensing control, is installed to comply with
Section 130.1(c)1, it shall incorporate a manual override lighting control that:
A. Complies with Section 130.1(a); and
B. Allows the lighting to remain ON for no more than 2 hours when an override is initiated.
EXCEPTION to Section 130.1(c)3B: In the following function areas, the override time may exceed 2
hours: Malls, auditoriums, single tenant retail, industrial, and arenas where captive-key override is
4. If an automatic time-switch control, other than an occupant sensing control, is installed to comply with
Section 130.1(c)1, it shall incorporate an automatic holiday "shut-OFF" feature that turns OFF all loads for
at least 24 hours, and then resumes the normally scheduled operation.
EXCEPTION to Section 130.1(c)4: In retail stores and associated malls, restaurants, grocery stores,
churches, and theaters, the automatic time-switch control is not required to incorporate an automatic holiday
5. Areas where Occupant Sensing Controls are required to shut OFF All Lighting. In offices 250 square
feet or smaller, multipurpose rooms of less than 1,000 square feet, classrooms of any size, conference rooms
of any size, and restrooms of any size, lighting shall be controlled with occupant sensing controls to
automatically shut OFF all of the lighting when the room is unoccupied.
In areas required by Section 130.1(b) to have multilevel lighting controls, the occupant sensing controls
A. Partial-ON Occupant Sensor capable of automatically activating between 50-70 percent of controlled
B. Vacancy Sensor, where all lighting responds to a manual ON input only.
In areas not required by Section 130.1(b) to have multilevel lighting controls, the occupant sensing controls
SECTION 130.1 – MANDATORY INDOOR LIGHTING CONTROLS
2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards Page 179
C. Vacancy Sensor, where all lighting responds to a manual ON input only.
In addition, controls shall be provided that allow the lights to be manually shut-OFF in accordance with
Section 130.1(a) regardless of the sensor status.
6. Areas where full or partial OFF occupant sensing controls are required. Lighting installed in the
following areas shall meet the following requirements in addition to complying with Section 130.1(c)1.
A. In aisle ways and open areas in warehouses, lighting shall be controlled with occupant sensing controls
that automatically reduce lighting power by at least 50 percent when the areas are unoccupied. The
occupant sensing controls shall independently control lighting in each aisle way, and shall not control
lighting beyond the aisle way being controlled by the sensor.
EXCEPTION 1 to Section 130.1(c)6A: In aisle ways and open areas in warehouses in which the
installed lighting power is 80 percent or less of the value allowed under the Area Category Method,
occupant sensing controls shall reduce lighting power by at least 40 percent.
EXCEPTION 2 to Section 130.1(c)6A: When metal halide lighting or high pressure sodium lighting
is installed in warehouses, occupant sensing controls shall reduce lighting power by at least 40 percent.
B. In library book stack aisles 10 feet or longer that are accessible from only one end, and library book
stack aisles 20 feet or longer that are accessible from both ends, lighting shall be controlled with
occupant sensing controls that automatically reduce lighting power by at least 50 percent when the
areas are unoccupied. The occupant sensing controls shall independently control lighting in each aisle
way, and shall not control lighting beyond the aisle way being controlled by the sensor.
C. Lighting installed in corridors and stairwells shall be controlled by occupant sensing controls that
separately reduce the lighting power in each space by at least 50 percent when the space is unoccupied.
The occupant sensing controls shall be capable of automatically turning the lighting fully ON only in
the separately controlled space, and shall be automatically activated from all designed paths of egress.
7. Areas where partial OFF occupant sensing controls are required. Lighting installed in the following
areas shall meet the following requirements instead of complying with Section 130.1(c)1.
A. Lighting in stairwells and common area corridors that provide access to guest rooms and dwelling units
of high-rise residential buildings and hotel/motels shall be controlled with occupant sensing controls
that automatically reduce lighting power by at least 50 percent when the areas are unoccupied. The
occupant sensing controls shall be capable of automatically turning the lighting fully ON only in the
separately controlled space, and shall be automatically activated from all designed paths of egress.
EXCEPTION to Section 130.1(c)7A: In corridors and stairwells in which the installed lighting power
is 80 percent or less of the value allowed under the Area Category Method, occupant sensing controls
shall reduce power by at least 40 percent.
B. In parking garages, parking areas and loading and unloading areas, general lighting shall be controlled
by occupant sensing controls having at least one control step between 20 percent and 50 percent of
design lighting power. No more than 500 watts of rated lighting power shall be controlled together as a
single zone. A reasonably uniform level of illuminance shall be achieved in accordance with the
applicable requirements in TABLE 130.1-A. The occupant sensing controls shall be capable of
automatically turning the lighting fully ON only in the separately controlled space, and shall be
automatically activated from all designed paths of egress.
Interior areas of parking garages are classified as indoor lighting for compliance with Section
130.1(c)7B. Parking areas on the roof of a parking structure are classified as outdoor hardscape and
shall comply with the applicable provisions in Section 130.2.
EXCEPTION to Section 130.1(c)7B: Metal halide luminaires with a lamp plus ballast mean system
efficacy of greater than 75 lumens per watt, used for general lighting in parking garages, parking areas
and loading and unloading areas, shall be controlled by occupant sensing controls having at least one
control step between 20 percent and 60 percent of design lighting power.
8. Hotel motel guest rooms shall have captive card key controls, occupancy sensing controls, or automatic
controls such that, no longer than 20 minutes after the guest room has been vacated, lighting power is
SECTION 130.1 – MANDATORY INDOOR LIGHTING CONTROLS
Page 180 2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards
EXCEPTION to Section 130.1(c)8: One high efficacy luminaire as defined in TABLE 150.0-A that is
switched separately and where the switch is located within 6 feet of the entry door.
EXCEPTION 2 to Section 130.1(c): Lighting providing means of egress illumination, as the term is used in the
California Building Code, shall be configured to provide no less than the amount of light required by California
Building Code Section 1008 while in the partial-off mode.
(d) Automatic Daylighting Controls. The general lighting in skylit daylit zones and primary sidelit daylit zones, as
well as the general lighting in the combined primary and secondary sidelit daylit zones in parking garages, shall
provide controls that automatically adjust the power of the installed lighting up and down to keep the total light
level stable as the amount of incoming daylight changes. For skylight located in an atrium, the skylit daylit zone
definition shall apply to the floor area directly under the atrium and the top floor area directly adjacent to the
1. All skylit daylit zones and primary sidelit daylit zones, and the combined primary and secondary sidelit
daylit zones in parking garages shall be shown on the plans.
NOTE: Parking areas on the roof of a parking structure are outdoor hardscape, not skylit daylit areas.
2. The automatic daylighting controls shall provide separate control for luminaires in each type of daylit zone.
Luminaires that fall in both a skylit and sidelit daylit zone shall be controlled as part of the skylit zone.
3. The automatic daylighting controls shall:
A. For spaces required to install multilevel controls under Section 130.1(b), adjust lighting via continuous
dimming or the number of control steps provided by the multilevel controls;
B. For each space, ensure the combined illuminance from the controlled lighting and daylight is not less
than the illuminance from controlled lighting when no daylight is available;
C. For areas other than parking garages, ensure that when the daylight illuminance is greater than 150
percent of the design illuminance received from the general lighting system at full power, the general
lighting power in that daylight zone shall be reduced by a minimum of 65 percent; and
D. For parking garages, ensure that when illuminance levels measured at the farthest edge of the secondary
sidelit zone away from the glazing or opening are greater than 150 percent of the illuminance provided
by the controlled lighting when no daylight is available, the controlled lighting power consumption is
4. When photosensors are located within the daylit zone, at least one photosensor shall be located so that they
are not readily accessible to unauthorized personnel.
5. The location where calibration adjustments are made to the automatic daylighting controls shall be readily
accessible to authorized personnel but may be inside a locked case or under a cover which requires a tool
EXCEPTION 1 to Section 130.1(d): Areas under skylights where it is documented that existing adjacent
structures or natural objects block direct sunlight for more than 1,500 daytime hours per year between 8 a.m. and
EXCEPTION 2 to Section 130.1(d): Areas adjacent to vertical glazing below an overhang, where the overhang
covers the entire width of the vertical glazing, no vertical glazing is above the overhang, and the ratio of the
overhang projection to the overhang rise is greater than 1.5 for South, East and West orientations or greater than
EXCEPTION 3 to Section 130.1(d): Rooms in which the combined total installed general lighting power in the
Skylit Daylit Zone and Primary Sidelit Daylit Zone is less than 120 Watts, or parking garage areas where the
total combined general lighting power in the sidelit daylight zones is less than 60 watts.
EXCEPTION 4 to Section 130.1(d): Rooms that have a total glazing area of less than 24 square feet, or
parking garage areas with a combined total of less than 36 square feet of glazing or opening.
EXCEPTION 5 to Section 130.1(d): For parking garages, luminaires located in the daylight adaptation zone
and luminaires for only dedicated ramps. Daylight adaptation zone and dedicated ramps are defined in Section
SECTION 130.1 – MANDATORY INDOOR LIGHTING CONTROLS
2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards Page 181
EXCEPTION 6 to Section 130.1(d): Luminaires in sidelit daylit zones in retail merchandise sales and
(e) Demand Responsive Controls. See Section 110.12 for requirements for demand responsive lighting controls.
(f) Control Interactions. Each lighting control installed to comply with Section 130.1 shall permit or incorporate
the functions of the other lighting controls required by this Section.
1. For general lighting, the manual area control shall permit the level or amount of light provided while the
lighting is on to be set or adjusted by the controls specified in Section 130.1(b), (c), (d), and (e).
2. The manual area control shall permit the shutoff control to turn the lighting down or off.
3. The multilevel lighting control shall permit the automatic daylighting control to adjust the electric lighting
level in response to changes in the amount of daylight in the daylit zone.
4. The multilevel lighting control shall permit the demand responsive control to adjust the lighting during a
demand response event and to return it to the level set by the multilevel control after the event.
5. The shutoff control shall permit the manual area control to turn the lighting on. If the on request occurs
while an automatic time switch control would turn the lighting off, then the on request shall be treated as an
override request consistent with Section 130.1(c)3.
6. The automatic daylighting control shall permit the multilevel lighting control to adjust the level of lighting.
7. For lighting controlled by multilevel lighting controls and by occupant sensing controls that provide an
automatic-on function, the controls shall provide a partial-on function that is capable of automatically
activating between 50-70 percent of controlled lighting power.
SECTION 130.1 – MANDATORY INDOOR LIGHTING CONTROLS
Page 182 2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards
TABLE 130.1-A MULTILEVEL LIGHTING CONTROLS AND UNIFORMITY REQUIREMENTS
Minimum Required Control Steps Uniform level of
Luminaire Type ( percent of full rated power1 ) illuminance shall be
LED luminaires and LED source systems
GU-24 sockets rated for fluorescent > 20
watts Continuous dimming 20-100 percent
GU-24 sockets rated for fluorescent ≤ 20
Minimum one step between
Linear fluorescent and U-bent fluorescent ≤
Minimum one step in each range:
Linear fluorescent and U-bent fluorescent >
same area and in the same
Minimum one step between Continuous dimming; or
30 – 70 percent Separately switching circuits
Minimum one step between Switching alternate lamps in
same area and in the same
1. Full rated input power of ballast and lamp, corresponding to maximum ballast factor
2.Includes only pin based lamps: twin tube, multiple twin tube, and spiral lamps
EXCEPTION 1 to Table 130.1-A Minimum Required Control Steps: Classrooms with a connected general lighting
load of 0.7 watts per square feet or less shall have a minimum of one control step between 30-70 percent of full rated
EXCEPTION 2 to Table 130.1-A Minimum Required Control Steps: Library stack aisles, aisle ways and open areas in
warehouses, parking garages, parking areas, loading and unloading areas, stairwells, and corridors shall have a minimum
of one control step between 20-60 percent of full rated power, regardless of luminaire type.
SECTION 130.1 – MANDATORY INDOOR LIGHTING CONTROLS
2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards Page 183
SECTION 130.2 – OUTDOOR LIGHTING CONTROLS AND EQUIPMENT
Nonresidential, high-rise residential and hotel/motel buildings shall comply with the applicable requirements of
(b) Luminaire Cutoff Requirements. All outdoor luminaires of 6,200 initial luminaire lumens or greater, shall
comply with Backlight, Uplight, and Glare (collectively referred to as "BUG" in accordance with IES TM-15-
1. Maximum zonal lumens for Backlight, Uplight, and Glare shall be in accordance with Title 24, Part 11, Section
EXCEPTION 2 to Section 130.2(b): Lighting for building facades, public monuments, statues, and vertical
EXCEPTION 3 to Section 130.2(b): Lighting not permitted by a health or life safety statute, ordinance, or
EXCEPTION 4 to Section 130.2(b): Temporary outdoor lighting.
EXCEPTION 5 to Section 130.2(b): Replacement of existing pole mounted luminaires in hardscape areas
meeting all of the following conditions:
A. Where the existing luminaire does not meet the luminaire BUG requirements in Section 130.2(b); and
B. Spacing between existing poles is greater than six times the mounting height of the existing luminaires; and
C. Where no additional poles are being added to the site; and
D. Where new wiring to the luminaires is not being installed; and
E. Provided that the connected lighting power wattage is not increased.
EXCEPTION 6 to Section 130.2(b): Luminaires that illuminate the public right of way on publicly maintained
EXCEPTION 7 to Section 130.2(b): Outdoor lighting attached to a high-rise residential or hotel/motel building
and separately controlled from the inside of a dwelling unit or guest room.
(c) Controls for Outdoor Lighting. Outdoor lighting shall be independently controlled from other electrical loads,
and the controls for outdoor lighting shall meet the following functional requirements:
EXCEPTION 1 to Section 130.2(c): Outdoor lighting not permitted by a health or life safety statute, ordinance, or
EXCEPTION 2 to Section 130.2(c): Lighting in tunnels required to be illuminated 24 hours per day and 365 days
1. Daylight Availability. All installed outdoor lighting shall be controlled by a photo control, astronomical
time-switch control, or other control capable of automatically shutting OFF the outdoor lighting when
A. Automatic scheduling controls shall be capable of reducing the outdoor lighting power by at least 50
percent and no more than 90 percent, and separately capable of turning the lighting OFF, during
B. Automatic scheduling controls shall allow scheduling of a minimum of two nighttime periods with
independent lighting levels, and may include an override function that turns lighting ON during its
scheduled dim or OFF state for no more than two hours when an override is initiated.
C. Acceptance tests of outdoor lighting controls shall verify the scheduled occupied and unoccupied
SECTION 130.2 – OUTDOOR LIGHTING CONTROLS AND EQUIPMENT
Page 184 2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards
D. Automatic scheduling controls shall be installed for all outdoor lighting, and may be installed in
combination with motion sensing controls or other outdoor lighting controls.
A. Motion sensing controls shall be capable of reducing the outdoor lighting power of each controlled
luminaire by at least 50 percent and no more than 90 percent, and separately capable of turning the
B. Motion sensing controls shall be capable of reducing the lighting to its dim or OFF state no longer than
15 minutes after the area has been vacated, and of returning the lighting to its ON state when the area
C. No more than 1,500 watts of lighting power shall be controlled by a single sensor.
D. Motion sensing controls shall be installed for the following luminaires, and may be installed for other
outdoor lighting and in combination with other outdoor lighting controls:
i. Outdoor luminaires other than Building Façade, Ornamental Hardscape, Outdoor Dining, or
Outdoor Sales Frontage lighting, where the bottom of luminaire is mounted 24 feet or less above
ii. Outdoor wall mounted luminaires installed for Building Façade, Ornamental Hardscape or Outdoor
Dining lighting that have a bilaterally symmetric distribution as described in the IES Handbook
(typically referred to as “wall packs”) mounted 24 feet above grade or lower.
EXCEPTION 1 to Section 130.2(c)3: Luminaires with a maximum rated wattage of 40 watts each are not
required to have motion sensing controls.
EXCEPTION 2 to Section 130.2(c)3: Applications listed as Exceptions to Section 140.7(a) are not required to
EXCEPTION 3 to Section 130.2(c)3: Lighting subject to a health or life safety statute, ordinance, or regulation
may have a minimum time-out period longer than 15 minutes or a minimum dimming level above 50 percent
when necessary to comply with the applicable law.
SECTION 130.2 – OUTDOOR LIGHTING CONTROLS AND EQUIPMENT
2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards Page 185
SECTION 130.3 – SIGN LIGHTING CONTROLS
Nonresidential buildings other than healthcare facilities, high-rise residential buildings, and hotel/motel buildings
shall comply with the applicable requirements of Sections 130.3(a)1 through 130.3(a)3.
(a) Controls for Sign Lighting. All sign lighting shall meet the requirements below as applicable:
1. Indoor Signs. All indoor sign lighting other than exit sign lighting shall be controlled with an automatic
time-switch control or astronomical time-switch control.
2. Outdoor Signs. Outdoor sign lighting shall meet the following requirements as applicable:
A. All outdoor sign lighting shall be controlled with a photocontrol in addition to an automatic time-switch
EXCEPTION to Section 130.3(a)2A: Outdoor signs in tunnels, and signs in large permanently
covered outdoor areas that are intended to be continuously lit, 24 hours per day and 365 days per year.
B. All outdoor sign lighting that is ON both day and night shall be controlled with a dimmer that provides
the ability to automatically reduce sign lighting power by a minimum of 65 percent during nighttime
hours. Signs that are illuminated at night and for more than 1 hour during daylight hours shall be
considered ON both day and night.
EXCEPTION to Section 130.3(a)2B: Outdoor signs in tunnels and large covered areas that are
intended to be illuminated both day and night.
3. Demand Responsive Electronic Message Center (EMC) Control. See Section 110.12 for requirements for
SECTION 130.3 – SIGN LIGHTING CONTROLS
Page 186 2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards
SECTION 130.4 –LIGHTING CONTROL ACCEPTANCE AND
Nonresidential buildings other than healthcare facilities, high-rise residential buildings, and hotel/motel buildings
shall comply with the applicable requirements of Sections 130.4(a) through 130.4(c). Healthcare facilities shall
comply with the applicable acceptance and installation documentation requirements of OSHPD.
(a) Lighting Control Acceptance Requirements. Before an occupancy permit is granted, indoor and outdoor
lighting controls serving the building, area, or site shall be certified as meeting the Acceptance Requirements for
Code Compliance in accordance with Section 130.4(a). A Certificate of Acceptance shall be submitted to the
enforcement agency under Section 10-103(a) of Part 1, that:
1. Certifies that all of the lighting acceptance testing necessary to meet the requirements of Part 6 is
2. Certifies that the applicable procedures in Reference Nonresidential Appendix NA7.6 and NA7.8 have been
3. Certifies that automatic daylight controls comply with Section 130.1(d) and Reference Nonresidential
4. Certifies that lighting shut-OFF controls comply with Section 130.1(c) and Reference Nonresidential
5. Certifies that demand responsive controls comply with Section 130.1(e) and Reference Nonresidential
6. Certifies that outdoor lighting controls comply with the applicable requirements of Section 130.2(c) and
Reference Nonresidential Appendix NA7.8; and
7. Certifies that lighting systems receiving the Institutional Tuning Power Adjustment Factor comply with
Section 140.6(a)2J and Reference Nonresidential Appendix NA7.7.6.2.
(b) Lighting Control Installation Certificate Requirements. To be recognized for compliance with Part 6 an
Installation Certificate shall be submitted in accordance with Section 10-103(a) for any lighting control system,
Energy Management Control System, track lighting integral current limiter, track lighting supplementary
overcurrent protection panel, interlocked lighting system, lighting Power Adjustment Factor, or additional
wattage available for a videoconference studio, in accordance with the following requirements, as applicable:
1. Certification that when a lighting control system is installed to comply with lighting control requirements in
Part 6 it complies with the applicable requirements of Section 110.9; and complies with Reference
2. Certification that when an Energy Management Control System is installed to function as a lighting control
required by Part 6 it functionally meets all applicable requirements for each application for which it is
complies with Reference Nonresidential Appendix NA7.7.2.
5. Certification that interlocked lighting systems used to serve an approved area comply with Section
140.6(a)1; and comply with Reference Nonresidential Appendix NA7.7.5.
6. Certification that lighting controls installed to earn a lighting Power Adjustment Factor (PAF) comply with
Section 140.6(a)2; and comply with Reference Nonresidential Appendix NA7.7.6.
7. Certification that additional lighting wattage installed for a videoconference studio complies with Section
140.6(c)2Gvii; and complies with Reference Nonresidential Appendix NA7.7.7.
(c) When certification is required by Title 24, Part 1, Section 10-103.1, the acceptance testing specified by Section
130.4shall be performed by a Certified Lighting Controls Acceptance Test Technician (CLCATT). If the
CLCATT is operating as an employee, the CLCATT shall be employed by a Certified Lighting Controls
SECTION 130.4 –LIGHTING CONTROL ACCEPTANCE AND INSTALLATION CERTIFICATE REQUIREMENTS
2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards Page 187
Acceptance Test Employer. The CLCATT shall disclose on the Certificate of Acceptance a valid CLCATT
certification identification number issued by an approved Acceptance Test Technician Certification Provider.
The CLCATT shall complete all Certificate of Acceptance documentation in accordance with the applicable
SECTION 130.4 –LIGHTING CONTROL ACCEPTANCE AND INSTALLATION CERTIFICATE REQUIREMENTS
Page 188 2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards
SECTION 130.5 –ELECTRICAL POWER DISTRIBUTION SYSTEMS
Nonresidential, high-rise residential and hotel/motel buildings shall comply with the applicable requirements of
(a) Service Electrical Metering. Each electrical service or feeder shall have a permanently installed metering
system which measures electrical energy use in accordance with TABLE 130.5-A.
EXCEPTION 1 to Section 130.5(a): Service or feeder for which the utility company provides a metering
system that indicates instantaneous kW demand and kWh for a utility-defined period.
EXCEPTION 2 to Section 130.5(a): Electrical power distribution systems subject to California Electrical Code
(b) Separation of Electrical Circuits for Electrical Energy Monitoring. Electrical power distribution systems
shall be designed so that measurement devices can monitor the electrical energy usage of load types according to
EXCEPTION 1 to Section 130.5(b): For each separate load type, up to 10 percent of the connected load may
EXCEPTION 2 to Section 130.5(b): Electrical power distribution systems subject to California Electrical Code
(c) Voltage Drop. The maximum combined voltage drop on both installed feeder conductors and branch circuit
conductors to the farthest connected load or outlet shall not exceed 5 percent.
EXCEPTION to Section 130.5(c): Voltage drop permitted by California Electrical Code Sections 647.4, 695.6 and
(d) Circuit Controls for 120-Volt Receptacles and Controlled Receptacles. In all buildings, both controlled and
uncontrolled 120 volt receptacles shall be provided in office areas, lobbies, conference rooms, kitchen areas in
office spaces, and copy rooms. Additionally, hotel/motel guest rooms shall comply with Section 130.5(d)4.
Controlled receptacles shall meet the following requirements, as applicable:
1. Install a control capable of automatically shutting OFF the controlled receptacles when the space is typically
unoccupied, either at the receptacle or circuit level. When an automatic time switch control is installed it
shall incorporate an override control that allows the controlled receptacle to remain ON for no more than 2
hours when an override is initiated and an automatic holiday “shut-OFF” feature that turns OFF all loads for
at least 24 hours and then resumes the normally scheduled operation. Countdown timer switches shall not
be used to comply with the automatic time switch control requirements; and
2. Install at least one controlled receptacle within 6 feet from each uncontrolled receptacle or install a
splitwired receptacle with at least one controlled and one uncontrolled receptacle. Where receptacles are
installed in modular furniture in open office areas, at least one controlled receptacle shall be installed at
3. Provide a permanent and durable marking for controlled receptacles or circuits to differentiate them from
4. For hotel and motel guest rooms, install controlled receptacles for at least one-half of the 120-volt
receptacles in each guest room. Electric circuits serving controlled receptacles in guest rooms shall have
captive card key controls, occupancy sensing controls, or automatic controls so the power is switched off no
longer than 30 minutes after the guest room has been vacated.
NOTE: A hardwired power strip controlled by an occupant sensing control may be used to comply with Section
130.5(d). Plug-in strips and other plug-in devices shall not be used to comply with the requirements of this Section.
EXCEPTION 1 to Section 130.5(d): Receptacles that are only for the following purposes:
i. Receptacles specifically for refrigerators and water dispensers in kitchen areas.
ii. Receptacles located a minimum of six feet above the floor that are specifically for clocks.
iii. Receptacles for network copiers, fax machines, A/V and data equipment other than personal computers in
SECTION 130.5 –ELECTRICAL POWER DISTRIBUTION SYSTEMS
2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards Page 189
iv. Receptacles on circuits rated more than 20 amperes.
v. Receptacles connected to an uninterruptible power supply (UPS) that are intended to be in continuous use,
24 hours per day/365 days per year, and are marked to differentiate them from other uncontrolled
EXCEPTION 2 to Section 130.5(d): Receptacles in healthcare facilities.
(e) Demand responsive controls and equipment. See Section 110.12 for requirements for demand responsive
NOTE: Definitions of terms and phrases in Section 130.5 are determined as specified in Section 100.1(b). Terms and
phrases not found in Section 100.1(b) shall be defined as specified in Title 24, Part 3, Article 100 of the California
TABLE 130.5-A MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS FOR METERING OF ELECTRICAL LOAD
Electrical Services rated more than
rated more than 250 Services rated
Metering Functionality rated 50 kVA or 50kVA and less
kVA and less than or more than
Required Required Required Required
Not required Not required Required Required
Tracking kWh for a user-
Required Required Required Required
kWh per rate period Not required Not required Not required Required
SECTION 130.5 –ELECTRICAL POWER DISTRIBUTION SYSTEMS
Page 190 2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards
TABLE 130.5-B MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS FOR SEPARATION OF ELECTRICAL LOAD
Electrical Electrical Services Electrical Services
Services rated rated more than rated more than 250 Electrical Services
50 kVA or 50kVA and less than kVA and less than or rated more than
Lighting including exit All lighting All lighting
and egress lighting and Not required disaggregated by floor, disaggregated by floor,
exterior lighting type or area type or area
chillers, fans, heaters, All HVAC in aggregate All HVAC in aggregate
furnaces, package units, Not required All HVAC in aggregate and each HVAC load and each HVAC load
cooling towers, and rated at least 50 kVA rated at least 50kVA
Not required All loads in aggregate All loads in aggregate All loads in aggregate
and related systems and
All plug load in All plug load separated All plug load separated
aggregate by floor, type or area by floor, type or area
Groups of plug loads Groups of plug loads All groups of plug loads
appliances rated less Not required
exceeding 25 kVA exceeding 25 kVA exceeding 25 kVA
connected load in an connected load in an connected load in an
area less than 5000 sf area less than 5000 sf area less than 5000 sf
moving walks, and Not required All loads in aggregate All loads in aggregate All loads in aggregate
Not required All loads in aggregate All loads in aggregate All loads in aggregate
greater including Not required All loads in aggregate All loads in aggregate All loads in aggregate
Each group Each group Each group Each group
Not required All loads in aggregate All loads in aggregate All loads in aggregate
Charging stations for All loads in
All loads in aggregate All loads in aggregate All loads in aggregate
SECTION 130.5 –ELECTRICAL POWER DISTRIBUTION SYSTEMS
2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards Page 191
AND PRESCRIPTIVE COMPLIANCE APPROACHES
FOR ACHIEVING ENERGY EFFICIENCY
SECTION 140.0 – PERFORMANCE AND PRESCRIPTIVE COMPLIANCE
Nonresidential, high-rise residential and hotel/motel buildings shall comply with all of the following:
(a) The requirements of Sections 100.0 through 110.12 applicable to the building project (mandatory measures for
(b) The requirements of Sections 120.0 through 130.5 (mandatory measures for nonresidential, high-rise residential
(c) Either the performance compliance approach (energy budgets) specified in Section 140.1 or the prescriptive
compliance approach specified in Section 140.2 for the Climate Zone in which the building will be located.
Climate zones are shown in FIGURE 100.1-A.
NOTE to Section 140.0(c): The Commission periodically updates, publishes, and makes available to interested
persons and local enforcement agencies precise descriptions of the Climate Zones, which is available by zip
code boundaries depicted in the Reference Joint Appendices along with a list of the communities in each zone.
NOTE to Section 140.0: The requirements of Sections 140.1 through 140.9 apply to newly constructed buildings.
Section 141.0 specifies which requirements of Sections 140.1 through 140.9 also apply to additions or alterations to
SECTION 140.0 – PERFORMANCE AND PRESCRIPTIVE COMPLIANCE APPROACHES
Page 192 2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards
SECTION 140.1 – PERFORMANCE APPROACH: ENERGY BUDGETS
A building complies with the performance approach if the energy budget calculated for the Proposed Design
Building under Subsection (b) is no greater than the energy budget calculated for the Standard Design Building
(a) Energy Budget for the Standard Design Building. The energy budget for the Standard Design Building is
determined by applying the mandatory and prescriptive requirements to the Proposed Design Building. The
energy budget is the sum of the TDV energy for space-conditioning, indoor lighting, mechanical ventilation,
service water heating, and covered process loads.
(b) Energy Budget for the Proposed Design Building. The energy budget for a Proposed Design Building is
determined by calculating the TDV energy for the Proposed Design Building. The energy budget is the sum of
the TDV energy for space-conditioning, indoor lighting, mechanical ventilation and service water heating and
(c) Calculation of Energy Budget. The TDV energy for both the Standard Design Building and the Proposed
Design Building shall be computed by Compliance Software certified for this use by the Commission. The
processes for Compliance Software approval by the Commission are documented in the ACM Approval Manual.
SECTION 140.1 – PERFORMANCE APPROACH: ENERGY BUDGETS
2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards Page 193
To comply using the prescriptive approach, a building shall be designed with and shall have constructed and installed
systems and components meeting the applicable requirements of Sections 140.3 through 140.9.
Page 194 2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards
SECTION 140.3 – PRESCRIPTIVE REQUIREMENTS FOR BUILDING
A building complies with this section by being designed with and having constructed to meet all prescriptive
requirements in Subsection (a) and the requirements of Subsection (c) and (d) where they apply.
1. Exterior roofs and ceilings. Exterior roofs and ceilings shall comply with each of the applicable
A. Roofing Products. Shall meet the requirements of Section 110.8 and the applicable requirements of
a. Low-sloped roofs in Climate Zones 1 through 16 shall have:
1. A minimum aged solar reflectance of 0.63 and a minimum thermal emittance of 0.75; or
2. A minimum Solar Reflectance Index (SRI) of 75.
EXCEPTION 1 to Section 140.3(a)1Aia: Wood-framed roofs in Climate Zones 3 and 5 are
exempt from the requirements of Section 140.3(a)1Aia if the roof assembly has a U-factor of
EXCEPTION 2 to Section 140.3(a)1Aia: Roof constructions with a weight of at least 25
lb/ft² over the roof membrane are exempt from the requirements of Section 140.3(a)1Aia.
EXCEPTION 3 to SECTION 140.3(a)1Aia: An aged solar reflectance less than 0.63 is
allowed provided the maximum roof/ceiling U-factor in TABLE 140.3 is not exceeded.
b. Steep-sloped roofs in Climate Zones 1 through 16 shall have a minimum aged solar reflectance
of 0.20 and a minimum thermal emittance of 0.75, or a minimum SRI of 16.
ii. High-rise residential buildings and hotels and motels:
a. Low-sloped roofs in Climate Zones 9, 10, 11, 13, 14 and 15 shall have a minimum aged solar
reflectance of 0.55 and a minimum thermal emittance of 0.75, or a minimum SRI of 64.
EXCEPTION to Section 140.3(a)1Aiia: Roof constructions with a weight of at least 25 lb/ft²
b. Steep-sloped roofs in Climate Zones 2 through 15 shall have a minimum aged solar reflectance
of 0.20 and a minimum thermal emittance of 0.75, or a minimum SRI of 16.
SECTION 140.3 – PRESCRIPTIVE REQUIREMENTS FOR BUILDING ENVELOPES
2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards Page 195
TABLE 140.3 ROOF/CEILING INSULATION TRADEOFF FOR AGED SOLAR REFLECTANCE
Wood framed Wood Framed
and Other and Other
Aged Solar Climate Zone
Climate Zone All Other Climate
EXCEPTION to Section 140.3(a)1A: Roof area covered by building integrated photovoltaic panels
and building integrated solar thermal panels are not required to meet the minimum requirements for
B. Roof Insulation. Roofs shall have an overall assembly U-factor no greater than the applicable value in
Table 140.3- B, C or D, and where required by Section 110.8 and 120.7(a)3, insulation shall be placed
in direct contact with a continuous roof or drywall ceiling.
2. Exterior Walls. Exterior walls shall have an overall assembly U-factor no greater than the applicable value
3. Demising Walls. Demising walls shall meet the requirements of Section 120.7(b)7. Vertical windows in
demising walls between conditioned and unconditioned spaces shall have an area-weighted average U-
factor no greater than the applicable value in TABLE140.3-B, C or D.
4. Exterior Floors and Soffits. Exterior floors and soffits shall have an overall assembly U-factor no greater
than the applicable value in TABLE 140.3-B, C or D.
5. Exterior Windows. Vertical windows in exterior walls shall:
A. Percent window area shall be limited in accordance with the applicable requirements of i and ii below:
i. a west-facing area no greater than 40 percent of the gross west-facing exterior wall area, or 6 feet
times the west-facing display perimeter, whichever is greater; and
ii. a total area no greater than 40 percent of the gross exterior wall area, or 6 feet times the display
NOTE: Demising walls are not exterior walls, and therefore demising wall area is not part of the gross
exterior wall area or display perimeter, and windows in demising walls are not part of the window area.
B. Have an area-weighted average U-factor no greater than the applicable value in TABLE140.3-B, C or
EXCEPTION to Section 140.3(a)5B: For vertical windows containing chromogenic type glazing:
i. The lower-rated labeled U-factor shall be used with automatic controls to modulate the amount of
heat flow into the space in multiple steps in response to daylight levels or solar intensity; and
ii. Chromogenic glazing shall be considered separately from other glazing; and
iii. Area-weighted averaging with other glazing that is not chromogenic shall not be permitted.
SECTION 140.3 – PRESCRIPTIVE REQUIREMENTS FOR BUILDING ENVELOPES
Page 196 2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards
C. Have an area-weighted average Relative Solar Heat Gain Coefficient, RSHGC, excluding the effects of
interior shading, no greater than the applicable value in TABLE 140.3-B, C or D.
For purposes of this paragraph, the Relative Solar Heat Gain Coefficient, RSHGC, of a vertical window
i. The Solar Heat Gain Coefficient of the window; or
ii. Relative Solar Heat Gain Coefficient is calculated using EQUATION 140.3-A, if the window has
an overhang that extends beyond each side of the window jamb by a distance equal to the
EXCEPTION 1 to Section 140.3(a)5C: An area-weighted average Relative Solar Heat Gain
Coefficient of 0.56 or less shall be used for windows:
a. That are in the first story of exterior walls that form a display perimeter; and
b. For which codes restrict the use of overhangs to shade the windows.
EXCEPTION 2 to Section 140.3(a)5C: For vertical glazing containing chromogenic type glazing:
i. the lower-rate labeled RSHGC shall be used with automatic controls to modulate the amount of
heat flow into the space in multiple steps in response to daylight levels or solar intensity; and
ii. chromogenic glazing shall be considered separately from other glazing; and
iii. area-weighted averaging with other glazing that is not chromogenic shall not be permitted.
NOTE: Demising walls are not exterior walls, and therefore windows in demising walls are not subject
D. Have an area-weighted average Visible Transmittance (VT) no less than the applicable value in
EXCEPTION 1 to Section 140.3(a)5D: When the window’s primary and secondary sidelit daylit
zones are completely overlapped by one or more skylit daylit zones, then the window need not comply
EXCEPTION 2 to Section 140.3(a)5D: If the window’s VT is not within the scope of NFRC 200, or
ASTM E972, then the VT shall be calculated according to Reference Nonresidential Appendix NA6.
EXCEPTION 3 to Section 140.3(a)5D: For vertical glazing containing chromogenic type glazing:
i. The higher-rate labeled VT shall be used with automatic controls to modulate the amount of light
transmitted into the space in multiple steps in response to daylight levels or solar intensity; and
ii. Chromogenic glazing shall be considered separately from other glazing; and
iii. Area-weighted averaging with other glazing that is not chromogenic shall not be permitted.
NOTE: Demising walls are not exterior walls, and therefore windows in demising walls are not subject
EQUATION 140.3-A RELATIVE SOLAR HEAT GAIN COEFFICIENT, RSHGC
RSHGC = Relative Solar Heat Gain Coefficient.
SHGC = Solar Heat Gain Coefficient of the window.
H = Horizontal projection of the overhang from the surface of the window in feet, but no
SECTION 140.3 – PRESCRIPTIVE REQUIREMENTS FOR BUILDING ENVELOPES
2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards Page 197
V = Vertical distance from the window sill to the bottom of the overhang in feet.
a = -0.41 for north-facing windows, -1.22 for south-facing windows, and -0.92 for east and
b = 0.20 for north-facing windows, 0.66 for south-facing windows, and 0.35 for east and
EQUATION 140.3-B VERTICAL FENESTRATION MINIMUM VT
WWR = Window Wall Ratio, the ratio of (i) the total window area of the entire building to (ii)
the total gross exterior wall area of the entire building. If the WWR is greater than
A. Have an area no greater than 5 percent of the gross exterior roof area Skylight Roof Ratio (SRR); and
EXCEPTION to Section 140.3(a)6A: Buildings with an atria over 55 feet high shall have a skylight
area no greater than 10 percent of the gross exterior roof area.
B. Have an Area-Weighted Performance Rating U-factor no greater than the applicable value in
EXCEPTION to Section 140.3(a)6B: For skylights containing chromogenic type glazing:
i. the lower-rate labeled U-factor shall be used with automatic controls to modulate the amount of
heat flow into the space in multiple steps in response to daylight levels or solar intensity; and
ii. chromogenic glazing shall be considered separately from other glazing; and
iii. area-weighted averaging with other glazing that is not chromogenic shall not be permitted.
C. Have an area-weighted performance rating Solar Heat Gain Coefficient no greater than the applicable
EXCEPTION to Section 140.3(a)6C: For skylights containing chromogenic type glazing:
i. the lower-rated labeled SHGC shall be used with automatic controls to modulate the amount of
heat flow into the space in multiple steps in response to daylight levels or solar intensity; and
ii. chromogenic glazing shall be considered separately from other glazing; and
iii. area-weighted averaging with other glazing that is not chromogenic shall not be permitted.
D. Have an Area-Weighted Performance Rating VT no less than the applicable value in TABLE 140.3-B
EXCEPTION to Section 140.3(a)6D: For skylights containing chromogenic type glazing:
i. the higher-rated labeled VT shall be used with automatic controls to modulate the amount of light
transmitted into the space in multiple steps in response to daylight levels or solar intensity and;
ii. chromogenic glazing shall be considered separately from other glazing; and
iii. area-weighted averaging with other glazing that is not chromogenic shall not be permitted.
E. Have a glazing material or diffuser that has a measured haze value greater than 90 percent, determined
according to ASTM D1003, or other test method approved by the Energy Commission.
SECTION 140.3 – PRESCRIPTIVE REQUIREMENTS FOR BUILDING ENVELOPES
Page 198 2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards
EXCEPTION to Section 140.3(a)6E: Skylights designed and installed to exclude direct sunlight
entering the occupied space by the use of fixed or automated baffles or the geometry of the skylight and
7. Exterior doors. All exterior doors that separate conditioned space from unconditioned space or from
ambient air shall have a U-factor not greater than the applicable value in TABLE 140.3-B, C or D. Doors
that are more than one-half glass in area are considered Glazed Doors.
8. Relocatable Public School Buildings. In complying with Sections 140.3(a)1 to 7 shall meet the following:
A. Relocatable public school buildings shall comply with TABLE 140.3-B for a specific Climate Zone
when the manufacturer or builder of the relocatable public school building certifies that the building is
intended for use only in a specific Climate Zone; or
B. Relocatable public school buildings shall comply with TABLE 140.3-D for any Climate Zone when the
manufacturer or builder of the relocatable public school building certifies that the building is intended
for use in any Climate Zone; and
C. The manufacturer or builder of a relocatable public school building shall certify that components of the
building comply with requirements of this section by:
i. The placement of two (2) metal identification labels on the building, one mechanically fastened
and visible from the exterior and the other mechanically fastened to the interior frame above the
ceiling at the end of the module, both labels stating (in addition to any other information by the
Division of the State Architect or other law) "Complies with Title 24, Part 6 for all Climate
ii. Identification of the location of the 2 labels on the plans submitted to the enforcing agency.
9. Air Barrier. To meet the requirement of TABLE 140.3-B, all buildings shall have a continuous air barrier
that is designed and constructed to control air leakage into, and out of, the building’s conditioned space. The
air barrier shall be sealed at all joints for its entire length and shall be composed of:
A. Materials that have an air permeance not exceeding 0.004 cfm/ft2, under a pressure differential of 0.3
EXCEPTION to Section 140.3(a)9A: Materials in TABLE 140.3-A shall be deemed to comply with
Section 140.3(a)9A provided if all joints are sealed and all of the materials are installed as air barriers
in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions.
SECTION 140.3 – PRESCRIPTIVE REQUIREMENTS FOR BUILDING ENVELOPES
2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards Page 199
TABLE 140.3-A MATERIALS DEEMED TO COMPLY WITH SECTION 140.3(a)9A
MATERIALS AND THICKNESS MATERIALS AND THICKNESS
1 Plywood – min. 3/8 inches thickness 9 Built up roofing membrane
2 Oriented strand board – min. 3/8 inches thickness 10 Modified bituminous roof membrane
Extruded polystyrene insulation board – min. ½
3 11 Fully adhered single-ply roof membrane
Foil-back polyisocyanurate insulation board – min. A Portland cement or Portland sand parge, or a
½ inches thickness gypsum plaster, each with min. 5/8 inches thickness
Closed cell spray foam with a minimum density of
2.0 pcf and a min. 2.0 inches thickness
Open cell spray foam with a density no less than 0.4
6 pcf and no greater than 1.5 pcf, and a min. 5½ 14 Fully grouted concrete block masonry
Exterior or interior gypsum board min. 1/2 inches
7 15 Sheet steel or sheet aluminum
B. Assemblies of materials and components that have an average air leakage not exceeding 0.04 cfm/ft2,
under a pressure differential of 0.3 in. of water (1.57 psf) (0.2 L/m2 at 75 pa), when tested in
EXCEPTION to Section 140.3(a)9B: The following materials shall be deemed to comply with
Section 140.3(a)9B if all joints are sealed and all of the materials are installed as air barriers in
accordance with the manufacturer's instructions:
i. Concrete masonry walls that have at least two coatings of paint or at least two coatings of sealer
ii. Concrete masonry walls with integral rigid board insulation.
iv. Portland cement or Portland sand parge, or stucco, or a gypsum plaster, each with minimum 1/2
C. The entire building has an air leakage rate not exceeding 0.40 cfm/ft2 at a pressure differential of 0.3 in
of water (1.57 psf) (2.0 L/ m2 at 75 pa), when the entire building is tested, after completion of
construction, in accordance with ASTM E779 or another test method approved by the Commission.
EXCEPTION to Section 140.3(a)9: Relocatable Public School Buildings.
SECTION 140.3 – PRESCRIPTIVE REQUIREMENTS FOR BUILDING ENVELOPES
Page 200 2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards
TABLE 140.3-B – PRESCRIPTIVE ENVELOPE CRITERIA FOR NONRESIDENTIAL BUILDINGS (INCLUDING RELOCATABLE PUBLIC SCHOOL
BUILDINGS WHERE MANUFACTURER CERTIFIES USE ONLY IN SPECIFIC CLIMATE ZONE; NOT INCLUDING HIGH-RISE RESIDENTIAL BUILDINGS
Air Barrier NR NR NR NR NR NR NR NR NR REQ REQ REQ REQ REQ REQ REQ
SECTION 140.3 – PRESCRIPTIVE REQUIREMENTS FOR BUILDING ENVELOPES
2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards Page 201
CONTINUED: TABLE 140.3-B – PRESCRIPTIVE ENVELOPE CRITERIA FOR NONRESIDENTIAL BUILDINGS (INCLUDING RELOCATABLE PUBLIC
SCHOOL BUILDINGS WHERE MANUFACTURER CERTIFIES USE ONLY IN SPECIFIC CLIMATE ZONE; NOT INCLUDING HIGH-RISE RESIDENTIAL
BUILDINGS AND GUEST ROOMS OF HOTEL/MOTEL BUILDINGS)
Window Window Storefront Glazed Doors2
Glass, Curb Mounted Glass, Deck Mounted Plastic, Curb Mounted (TDDs)
SECTION 140.3 – PRESCRIPTIVE REQUIREMENTS FOR BUILDING ENVELOPES
Page 202 2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards
TABLE 140.3-C – PRESCRIPTIVE ENVELOPE CRITERIA FOR HIGH-RISE RESIDENTIAL BUILDINGS AND GUEST ROOMS OF HOTEL/MOTEL
SECTION 140.3 – PRESCRIPTIVE REQUIREMENTS FOR BUILDING ENVELOPES
2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards Page 203
CONTINUED: TABLE 140.3-C – PRESCRIPTIVE ENVELOPE CRITERIA FOR HIGH-RISE RESIDENTIAL BUILDINGS AND GUEST ROOMS OF
Glass, Curb Mounted Glass, Deck Mounted Plastic, Curb Mounted
1.As defined in Section 100.0, light mass walls are walls with a heat capacity of at least 7.0 Btu/ft²-oF and less than 15.0 Btu/ft²-oF. Heavy mass walls are walls with a heat capacity of at least 15.0
2.Glazed Doors applies to both site-built and to factory-assembled glazed doors.
SECTION 140.3 – PRESCRIPTIVE REQUIREMENTS FOR BUILDING ENVELOPES
Page 204 2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards
TABLE 140.3-D PRESCRIPTIVE ENVELOPE CRITERIA FOR RELOCATABLE PUBLIC SCHOOL
BUILDINGS FOR USE IN ALL CLIMATE ZONES
Floors and Soffits Floors and Soffits 0.048
Exterior Doors Maximum U-factor
SECTION 140.3 – PRESCRIPTIVE REQUIREMENTS FOR BUILDING ENVELOPES
2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards Page 205
(c) Minimum Daylighting Requirement for Large Enclosed Spaces. In Climate Zones 2 through 15, conditioned
enclosed spaces, and unconditioned enclosed spaces, that are greater than 5,000 ft² and that are directly under a
roof with ceiling heights greater than 15 feet, shall meet the following requirements:
1. A combined total of at least 75 percent of the floor area, as determined in building floor plan (drawings)
view, shall be within one or more of the following:
A. Primary Sidelight Daylight Zone in accordance with Section 130.1(d), or
B. The total floor area in the space within a horizontal distance of 0.7 times the average ceiling height
from the edge of rough opening of skylights.
2. All Skylit Daylit Zones and Primary Sidelit Daylit Zones shall be shown on building plans.
3. General lighting in daylit zones shall be controlled in accordance with Section 130.1(d).
4. The total skylight area is at least 3 percent of the total floor area in the space within a horizontal distance of
0.7times the average ceiling height from the edge of rough opening of skylights; or the product of the total
skylight area and the average skylight visible transmittance is no less than 1.5 percent of the total floor area
in the space within a horizontal distance of 0.7 times the average ceiling height from the edge of rough
5. All skylights shall have a glazing material or diffuser that has a measured haze value greater than 90
percent, tested according to ASTM D1003 (notwithstanding its scope) or an\other test method approved by
6. Skylights for conditioned and unconditioned spaces shall have an area-weighted average Visible
Transmittance (VT) no less than the applicable value required by Section 140.3(a)6D.
EXCEPTION 1 to Section 140.3(c): Auditoriums, churches, movie theaters, museums, and refrigerated
EXCEPTION 2 to Section 140.3(c): In buildings with unfinished interiors, future enclosed spaces for which
A. A floor area of less than or equal to 5,000 square feet; or
B. Ceiling heights of less than or equal to 15 feet. This exception shall not be used for S-1 or S-2 (storage),
EXCEPTION 3 to Section 140.3(c): Enclosed spaces having a designed general lighting system with a lighting
power density less than 0.5 watts per square foot.
EXCEPTION 4 to Section 140.3(c): Enclosed spaces where it is documented that permanent architectural
features of the building, existing structures or natural objects block direct beam sunlight on at least half of the
roof over the enclosed space for more than 1500 daytime hours per year between 8 a.m. and 4 p.m.
(d) Daylighting Design Power Adjustment Factors (PAFs). To qualify for a Power Adjustment Factor (PAF) as
specified in Section 140.6(a)2L, daylighting devices shall meet the following requirements:
1. Clerestory Fenestration. To qualify for a PAF, clerestory fenestration shall meet the following
B. Shall have a head height that is at least 10 feet above the finished floor.
C. Shall have a glazing height that is greater than or equal to 10 percent of the head height.
D. If operable shading is installed on the clerestory fenestration, then the clerestory fenestration shading
shall be controlled separately from shading serving other vertical fenestration.
2. Interior and Exterior Horizontal Slats. To qualify for a PAF, horizontal slats shall meet the following
SECTION 140.3 – PRESCRIPTIVE REQUIREMENTS FOR BUILDING ENVELOPES
Page 206 2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards
A. Shall be installed adjacent to vertical fenestration on east- or west-facing facades with Window Wall
Ratios between 20 and 30 percent, and extend to the entire height of the vertical fenestration.
B. Exterior horizontal slats shall be level or sloped downwards from fenestration. Interior horizontal slats
shall be level or sloped upwards from fenestration.
C. Shall have a projection factor as specified in Table 140.3-D. The projection factor is calculated using
D. Shall have a minimum Distance Factor of 0.3. The distance factor is calculated using EQUATION
EXCEPTION to Section 140.3(d)2D: Where it is documented that existing adjacent structures or
natural objects within view of the vertical fenestration block direct sunlight onto the vertical
fenestration between 8 a.m. and 5 p.m. for less than 500 daytime hours per year.
E. Shall have a minimum Visible Reflectance of 0.50 when tested as specified in ASTM E903.
EXCEPTION to Section 140.3(d)2F: Horizontal slats with a Visible Transmittance of 0.03 or less
when tested as specified in ASTM E1175.
G. Shall be permanently mounted and not adjustable.
H. Shall extend beyond each side of the window jamb by a distance equal to or greater than their
EXCEPTION to Section 140.3(d)2H: Where the slats are located entirely within the vertical fenestration’s
rough opening or a fin is located at the window jambs and extends vertically the entire height of the
window jamb and extends horizontally the entire depth of the projection.
I. Shall be shown on the plans with the dimensions for the slat projection and slat spacing as specified in
J. Shall have a conspicuous factory installed label permanently affixed and prominently located on an
attachment point of the device to the building envelope, stating the following: “NOTICE: Removal of
this device will require re-submittal of compliance documentation to the enforcement agency
responsible for compliance with California Title 24, Part 6”.
3. Interior and Exterior Light Shelves. To qualify for a PAF, light shelves shall meet the following
A. Where there is vertical fenestration area below the light shelf, both interior and exterior light shelves
B. Shall be installed adjacent to clerestory fenestration on south-facing facades with Window Wall Ratios
greater than 30 percent. The head height of the light shelves shall be no more than one foot below the
finished ceiling. The clerestory fenestration shall meet the requirements of Section 140.3(d)1.
C. Shall be level or sloped based on their installation. Exterior light shelves shall be level or sloped
downwards from fenestration. Interior light shelves shall be level or sloped upwards from fenestration.
D. Shall have a projection factor of the applicable value as specified in Table 140.3-E. The light shelf
projection factor is calculated using EQUATION 140.3-E.
E. Shall have a minimum Distance Factor of 0.3. The distance factor is calculated using EQUATION
EXCEPTION to Section 140.3(d)3E: Where it is documented that existing adjacent structures or
natural objects within view of the vertical fenestration block direct sunlight onto the vertical fenestration
between 8 a.m. and 5 p.m. for less than 750 daytime hours per year.
F. Shall have a top surface with a minimum Visible Reflectance of 0.50 when tested as specified in ASTM
SECTION 140.3 – PRESCRIPTIVE REQUIREMENTS FOR BUILDING ENVELOPES
2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards Page 207
EXCEPTION to Section 140.3(d)3F: Where an exterior light shelf is installed greater than two feet
G. Shall extend beyond each side of the window jamb by a distance equal to or greater than their horizontal
H. Shall be shown on the plans with the dimensions for the light shelf projection and light shelf spacing as
Daylighting Device Projection Factor
Horizontal Slats East or West 2.0 to 3.0
Interior Light Shelf South 1.0 to 2.0
Exterior Light Shelf South 0.25 to 1.25
EQUATION 140.3-E PROJECTION AND DISTANCE FACTOR CALCULATION
Projection Factor = Projection / Spacing
Projection = The horizontal distance between the base edge and the projected edge of
Spacing = For horizontal slats, the vertical distance between the projected edge of a
slat to the base edge of the slat below
For interior light shelves, the vertical distance between the projected edge
of the light shelf and head of the clerestory fenestration above it.
For exterior light shelves, the vertical distance between the projected
edge of the light shelf and sill of the vertical fenestration below it.
D = Distance between the existing structure or nature object and the
H = Height difference between the top of the existing structure or nature
object and the bottom of the fenestration
NOTE: The base edge is the edge of a slat or light shelf that is adjacent to the
vertical fenestration. The projected edge is the opposite edge from the
SECTION 140.3 – PRESCRIPTIVE REQUIREMENTS FOR BUILDING ENVELOPES
Page 208 2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards
SECTION 140.4 – PRESCRIPTIVE REQUIREMENTS FOR SPACE
A building complies with this section by being designed with and having constructed and installed a space-
conditioning system that meets the applicable requirements of Subsections (a) through (o).
(a) Sizing and Equipment Selection. Mechanical heating and mechanical cooling equipment serving healthcare
facilities shall be sized to meet the design heating and cooling loads as calculated according to the subsection
(b). Mechanical heating and mechanical cooling equipment serving high-rise residential buildings, hotel/motel
buildings and nonresidential buildings other than healthcare facilities, shall be the smallest size, within the
available options of the desired equipment line, necessary to meet the design heating and cooling loads of the
EXCEPTION 1 to Section 140.4(a): Where it can be demonstrated to the satisfaction of the enforcing agency
that oversizing will not increase building TDV energy use.
EXCEPTION 2 to Section 140.4(a): Standby equipment with controls that allow the standby equipment to
operate only when the primary equipment is not operating.
EXCEPTION 3 to Section 140.4(a): Multiple units of the same equipment type, such as multiple chillers and
boilers, having combined capacities exceeding the design load, if they have controls that sequence or otherwise
optimally control the operation of each unit based on load.
(b) Calculations. In making equipment sizing calculations under Subsection (a), all of the following rules shall
1. Heating and cooling loads. Heating and cooling system design loads shall be determined in accordance
with the procedures described in subsection A or B below:
A. For systems serving high-rise residential buildings, hotel/motel buildings, and nonresidential buildings
other than healthcare facilities, the method in the 2017 ASHRAE Handbook, Fundamentals shall be
used, or as specified in a method approved by the Commission.
B. For system serving healthcare facilities the method in the California Mechanical Code shall be used.
2. Indoor design conditions. Indoor design temperature and humidity conditions for comfort applications
shall be determined in accordance with subsection A or B below:
A. For systems serving high-rise residential buildings, hotel/motel buildings, and nonresidential buildings
other than healthcare facilities, ASHRAE Standard 55 or the 2017 ASHRAE Handbook, Fundamentals
Volume, except that winter humidification and summer dehumidification shall not be required.
B. For system serving healthcare facilities the method in Section 320.0 of the California Mechanical Code
3. Outdoor design conditions. Outdoor design conditions shall be selected in accordance with subsection A
A. For systems serving high-rise residential buildings, hotel/motel buildings, and nonresidential buildings
other than healthcare facilities the design conditions from Reference Joint Appendix JA2 shall be used,
which is based on data from the ASHRAE Climatic Data for Region X. Heating design temperatures
shall be no lower than the Heating Winter Median of Extremes values. Cooling design temperatures
shall be no greater than the 0.5 percent Cooling Dry Bulb and Mean Coincident Wet Bulb values.
B. For system serving healthcare facilities the method in Section 320.0 of the California Mechanical Code
EXCEPTION to Section 140.4(b)3: Cooling design temperatures for cooling towers shall be no greater
than the 0.5 percent Cooling Design Wet bulb values.
4. Ventilation. Outdoor air ventilation loads shall be calculated using the ventilation rates required in Section
SECTION 140.4 – PRESCRIPTIVE REQUIREMENTS FOR SPACE CONDITIONING SYSTEMS
2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards Page 209
5. Envelope. Envelope heating and cooling loads shall be calculated using envelope characteristics, including
square footage, thermal conductance, Solar Heat Gain Coefficient or shading coefficient, and air leakage,
consistent with the proposed design.
6. Lighting. Lighting heating and cooling loads shall be based on actual design lighting levels or power
7. People. Occupant density shall be based on the expected occupancy of the building and shall be the same as
determined under Section 120.1(c)3A, if used. Sensible and latent heat gains shall be as listed in the 2017
8. Process loads. Loads caused by a process shall be based upon actual information on the intended use of the
9. Miscellaneous equipment. Equipment loads other than process loads shall be calculated using design data
compiled from one or more of the following sources:
A. Actual information based on the intended use of the building; or
B. Published data from manufacturer's technical publications or from technical societies, such as the
C. Other data based on the designer's experience of expected loads and occupancy patterns.
10. Internal heat gains. Internal heat gains may be ignored for heating load calculations.
11. Safety factor. Calculated design loads based on 140.4(b)1 through 10 may be increased by up to 10 percent
to account for unexpected loads or changes in space usage.
12. Other loads. Loads such as warm-up or cool-down shall be calculated from principles based on the thermal
capacity of the building and its contents, the degree of setback, and desired recovery time; or may be
assumed to be no more than 30 percent for heating and 10 percent for cooling of the steady-state design
loads. In addition, the steady-state load may include a safety factor in accordance with Section 140.4(b)11.
(c) Fan Systems. Each fan system having a total fan system motor nameplate horsepower exceeding 5 hp used for
space conditioning shall meet the requirements of Items 1, 2, and 3 below. Total fan system power demand
equals the sum of the power demand of all fans in the system that are required to operate at design conditions in
order to supply air from the heating or cooling source to the conditioned space, and to return it back to the
1. Fan Power Limitation. At design conditions each fan system shall not exceed the allowable fan system
power of option 1 or 2 as specified in Table 140.4-A
TABLE 140.4 - A Fan Power Limitation
Limit Constant Volume Variable Volume
1cfm = maximum design supply airflow rate to conditioned spaces served by the system in cubic feet per
hp = maximum combined motor nameplate horsepower for all fans in the system
bhp = maximum combined fan-brake horsepower for all fans in the system
PD = each applicable pressure drop adjustment from Table 140.4 – B, in inches of water
cfm = the design airflow through each applicable device from Table 140.4 – B, in cubic feet per minute
SECTION 140.4 – PRESCRIPTIVE REQUIREMENTS FOR SPACE CONDITIONING SYSTEMS
Page 210 2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards
TABLE 140.4-B – Fan Power Limitation Pressure Drop Adjustment
Return or exhaust systems required by code or 0.5 in. of water
systems required to maintain air pressure
differentials between adjacent rooms
Return and/or exhaust airflow control devices 0.5 in. of water
Exhaust filters, scrubbers, or other exhaust The pressure drop of device calculated at fan
treatment system design condition
Particulate Filtration Credit: MERV 16 and greater Pressure drop calculated at 2 × clean filter pressure
and electronically enhanced filters drop at fan system design condition
Carbon and other gas-phase air cleaners Clean filter pressure drop at fan system design
Biosafety cabinet Pressure drop of device at fan system design
Energy recovery device, other than coil runaround For each airstream [(2.2 × Energy Recovery
Coil runaround loop 0.6 in. of water for each airstream
Exhaust systems serving fume hoods 0.35 in. of water
A. Static Pressure Sensor Location. Static pressure sensors used to control variable air volume fans shall
be placed in a position such that the controller set point is no greater than one-third the total design fan
static pressure, except for systems with zone reset control complying with Section140.4(c)2B. If this
results in the sensor being located downstream of any major duct split, multiple sensors shall be
installed in each major branch with fan capacity controlled to satisfy the sensor furthest below its
B. Setpoint Reset. For systems with direct digital control of individual zone boxes reporting to the central
control panel, static pressure setpoints shall be reset based on the zone requiring the most pressure; i.e.,
the set point is reset lower until one zone damper is nearly wide open.
3. Fractional HVAC Motors for Fans. HVAC motors for fans that are less than 1 hp and 1/12 hp or greater
shall be electronically-commutated motors or shall have a minimum motor efficiency of 70 percent when
rated in accordance with NEMA Standard MG 1-2006 at full load rating conditions. These motors shall also
have the means to adjust motor speed for either balancing or remote control. Belt-driven fans may use
sheave adjustments for airflow balancing in lieu of a varying motor speed.
EXCEPTION 1 to Section 140.4(c)3: Motors in fan-coils and terminal units that operate only when
providing heating to the space served.
EXCEPTION 2 to Section 140.4(c)3: Motors in space conditioning equipment certified under Section
EXCEPTION 1 to 140.4(c): fan system power caused solely by process loads.
EXCEPTION 2 to 140.4(c): Systems serving healthcare facilities.
(d) Space-conditioning Zone Controls. Each space-conditioning zone shall have controls designed in accordance
1. Each space-conditioning zone shall have controls that prevent:
SECTION 140.4 – PRESCRIPTIVE REQUIREMENTS FOR SPACE CONDITIONING SYSTEMS
2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards Page 211
C. Simultaneous provisions of heating and cooling to the same zone, such as mixing or simultaneous
supply of air that has been previously mechanically heated and air that has been previously cooled
either by cooling equipment or by economizer systems; or
2. Zones served by variable air-volume systems that are designed and controlled to reduce, to a minimum, the
volume of reheated, recooled, or mixed air are allowed only if the controls meet all of the following
A. For each zone with direct digital controls (DDC):
i. The volume of primary air that is reheated, recooled or mixed air supply shall not exceed the larger
a. 50 percent of the peak primary airflow; or
b. The design zone outdoor airflow rate as specified by Section 120.1(c)3.
ii. The volume of primary air in the deadband shall not exceed the larger of:
a. 20 percent of the peak primary airflow; or
b. The design zone outdoor airflow rate as specified by Section 120.1(c)3.
iii. The first stage of heating consists of modulating the zone supply air temperature setpoint up to a
maximum setpoint no higher than 95ºF while the airflow is maintained at the deadband flow rate.
iv. The second stage of heating consists of modulating the airflow rate from the deadband flow rate up
to the heating maximum flow rate.
B. For each zone without DDC, the volume of primary air that is reheated, re-cooled, or mixed air supply
shall not exceed the larger of the following:
i. 30 percent of the peak primary airflow; or
ii. The design zone outdoor airflow rate as specified by Section 120.1(c)3.
EXCEPTION 1 to Section 140.4(d): Zones with special pressurization relationships or cross-contamination
EXCEPTION 2 to Section 140.4(d): Zones served by space-conditioning systems in which at least 75 percent
of the energy for reheating, or providing warm air in mixing systems, is provided from a site-recovered or site-
EXCEPTION 3 to Section 140.4(d): Zones in which specific humidity levels are required to satisfy exempt
process loads. Computer rooms or other spaces where the only process load is from IT equipment may not use
EXCEPTION 4 to Section 140.4(d): Zones with a peak supply-air quantity of 300 cfm or less.
EXCEPTION 5 to Section 140.4(d): Systems serving healthcare facilities.
1. Each cooling air handler that has a design total mechanical cooling capacity over 54,000 Btu/hr, or chilled-
water cooling systems without a fan or that use induced airflow that has a cooling capacity greater than the
systems listed in Table 140.4-C, shall include either:
A. An air economizer capable of modulating outside-air and return-air dampers to supply 100 percent of
the design supply air quantity as outside-air; or
B. A water economizer capable of providing 100 percent of the expected system cooling load, at outside
air temperatures of 50°F dry-bulb and 45°F wet-bulb and below.
EXCEPTION 1 to Section 140.4(e)1: Where special outside air filtration and treatment, for the reduction
and treatment of unusual outdoor contaminants, makes compliance infeasible.
SECTION 140.4 – PRESCRIPTIVE REQUIREMENTS FOR SPACE CONDITIONING SYSTEMS
Page 212 2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards
EXCEPTION 2 to Section 140.4(e)1: Where the use of outdoor air for cooling will affect other systems,
such as humidification, dehumidification, or supermarket refrigeration systems, so as to increase overall
EXCEPTION 3 to Section 140.4(e)1: Systems serving high-rise residential living quarters and hotel/motel
EXCEPTION 4 to Section 140.4(e)1: Where comfort cooling systems have the cooling efficiency that
meets or exceeds the cooling efficiency improvement requirements in TABLE 140.4-D.
EXCEPTION 5 to Section 140.4(e)1: Fan systems primarily serving computer rooms. See Section
140.9(a) for computer room economizer requirements.
EXCEPTION 6 to Section 140.4(e)1: Systems design to operate at 100 percent outside air at all times.
TABLE 140.4-C CHILLED WATER SYSTEM COOLING CAPACITY
Total Building Chilled Water System Capacity, Minus Capacity of
the Cooling units with Air Economizers
TABLE 140.4-D ECONOMIZER TRADE-OFF TABLE FOR COOLING SYSTEMS
Climate Zone Efficiency Improvement a
4 65% a If a unit is rated with an IPLV, IEER or
5 70% SEER, then to eliminate the required air or
minimum cooling efficiency of the HVAC
unit must be increased by the percentage
shown. If the HVAC unit is only rated with
9 30% a full load metric, such as EER or COP
10 30% cooling, then that metric must be increased
2. If an economizer is required by Section 140.4(e)1, and an air economizer is used to meet the requirement,
A. Designed and equipped with controls so that economizer operation does not increase the building
heating energy use during normal operation; and
SECTION 140.4 – PRESCRIPTIVE REQUIREMENTS FOR SPACE CONDITIONING SYSTEMS
2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards Page 213
EXCEPTION to Section 140.4(e)2A: Systems that provide 75 percent of the annual energy used for
mechanical heating from site-recovered energy or a site-solar energy source.
B. Capable of providing partial cooling even when additional mechanical cooling is required to meet the
C. Designed and equipped with a device type and high limit shut off complying with TABLE 140.4-E.
TABLE 140.4-E AIR ECONOMIZER HIGH LIMIT SHUT OFF CONTROL REQUIREMENTS
Required High Limit (Economizer Off When):
Device Typea Climate Zones
7 T > 69°F Outdoor air temperature exceeds 69°F
Outdoor air temperature exceeds return air
Outdoor air temperature exceeds return air
Outdoor air temperature exceeds return air
Outdoor air temperature exceeds return air
Outdoor air enthalpy exceeds 28 Btu/lb of dry
Fixed Enthalpyc + All h > 28 Btu/lbc or T > 75°F airc or
Outdoor air temperature exceeds 75°F
a Only the high limit control devices listed are allowed to be used and at the setpoints listed. Others such as
Dew Point, Fixed Enthalpy, Electronic Enthalpy, and Differential Enthalpy Controls, may not be used in any
Climate Zone for compliance with Section 140.4(e)1 unless approval for use is provided by the Energy
b Devices with selectable (rather than adjustable) setpoints shall be capable of being set to within 2°F and 2
c At altitudes substantially different than sea level, the Fixed Enthalpy limit value shall be set to the enthalpy
value at 75°F and 50% relative humidity. As an example, at approximately 6,000 foot elevation, the fixed
D. The air economizer and all air dampers shall have the following features:
ii. Damper reliability testing. Suppliers of economizers shall certify that the economizer assembly,
including but not limited to outdoor air damper, return air damper, drive linkage, and actuator, have
been tested and are able to open and close against the rated airflow and pressure of the system for
60,000 damper opening and closing cycles.
iii. Damper leakage. Economizer outdoor air and return air dampers shall have a maximum leakage rate
of 10 cfm/sf at 250 Pascals (1.0 in. of water) when tested in accordance with AMCA Standard 500-D.
The economizer outside air and return air damper leakage rates shall be certified to the Energy
Commission in accordance with Section 110.0.
iv. Adjustable setpoint. If the high-limit control is fixed dry-bulb or fixed enthalpy + fixed dry-bulb then
the control shall have an adjustable setpoint.
v. Sensor accuracy. Outdoor air, return air, mixed air, and supply air sensors shall be calibrated within
SECTION 140.4 – PRESCRIPTIVE REQUIREMENTS FOR SPACE CONDITIONING SYSTEMS
Page 214 2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards
1. Drybulb and wetbulb temperatures accurate to ±2°F over the range of 40°F to 80°F;
2. Enthalpy accurate to ±3 Btu/lb over the range of 20 Btu/lb to 36 Btu/lb;
3. Relative humidity (RH) accurate to ±5 percent over the range of 20 percent to 80 percent RH;
vi. Sensor calibration data. Data used for control of the economizer shall be plotted on a sensor
vii. Sensor high limit control. Sensors used for the high limit control shall be located to prevent false
readings, including but not limited to being properly shielded from direct sunlight.
viii.Relief air system. Relief air systems shall be capable of providing 100 percent outside air without
E. The space conditioning system shall include the following:
A. Unit controls shall have mechanical capacity controls interlocked with economizer controls such that
the economizer is at 100 percent open position when mechanical cooling is on and does not begin to
close until the leaving air temperature is less than 45oF.
B. Direct Expansion (DX) units greater than 65,000 Btu/hr that control the capacity of the mechanical
cooling directly based on occupied space temperature shall have a minimum of two stages of
C. DX units not within the scope of Section 140.4(e)2E,B shall (i) comply with the requirements in
TABLE 140.4-F, and (ii) shall have controls that do not false load the mechanical cooling system by
limiting or disabling the economizer or by any other means except at the lowest stage of mechanical
TABLE 140.4-F DIRECT EXPANSION (DX) UNIT REQUIREMENTS
FOR COOLING STAGES AND COMPRESSOR DISPLACEMENT
Minimum Number of Minimum Compressor
Mechanical Cooling Stages Displacement
3. Systems that include a water economizer to meet Section 140.4(e)1 shall include the following:
A. Maximum pressure drop. Precooling coils and water-to-water heat exchangers used as part of a water
economizer shall either have a waterside pressure drop of less than 15 feet of water, or a secondary
loop shall be installed so that the coil or heat exchanger pressure drop is not contributing to pressure
drop when the system is in the normal cooling (non-economizer) mode.
B. Economizer systems shall be integrated with the mechanical cooling system so that they are capable of
providing partial cooling even when additional mechanical cooling is required to meet the remainder of
the cooling load. Controls shall not false load the mechanical cooling system by limiting or disabling
the economizer or by any other means, such as hot gas bypass, except at the lowest stage of mechanical
(f) Supply Air Temperature Reset Controls. Space-conditioning systems supplying heated or cooled air to
multiple zones shall include controls that automatically reset supply-air temperatures. Air distribution systems
serving zones that are likely to have constant loads shall be designed for the airflows resulting from the fully
reset supply air temperature. Supply air temperature reset controls shall be:
1. In response to representative building loads or to outdoor air temperature; and
2. At least 25 percent of the difference between the design supply-air temperature and the design room air
SECTION 140.4 – PRESCRIPTIVE REQUIREMENTS FOR SPACE CONDITIONING SYSTEMS
2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards Page 215
EXCEPTION 1 to Section 140.4(f): Systems that meet the requirements of Section 140.4(d)1, without using
EXCEPTION 2 to Section 140.4(f): Where supply-air temperature reset would increase overall building energy
EXCEPTION 3 to Section 140.4(f): Systems supplying zones in which specific humidity levels are required to
satisfy process loads. Computer Rooms or other spaces with only IT equipment may not use this exception.
EXCEPTION 4 to Section 140.4(f): Systems serving healthcare facilities.
(g) Electric Resistance Heating. Electric resistance heating systems shall not be used for space heating.
EXCEPTION 1 to Section 140.4(g): Where an electric-resistance heating system supplements a heating system
in which at least 60 percent of the annual energy requirement is supplied by site-solar or recovered energy.
EXCEPTION 2 to Section 140.4(g): Where an electric-resistance heating system supplements a heat pump
heating system, and the heating capacity of the heat pump is more than 75 percent of the design heating load
calculated in accordance with Section 140.4(a) at the design outdoor temperature specified in Section 140.4(b)4.
EXCEPTION 3 to Section 140.4(g): Where the total capacity of all electric-resistance heating systems serving
the entire building is less than 10 percent of the total design output capacity of all heating equipment serving the
EXCEPTION 4 to Section 140.4(g): Where the total capacity of all electric-resistance heating systems serving
the entire building, excluding those allowed under Exception 2, is no more than 3 kW.
EXCEPTION 5 to Section 140.4(g): Where an electric resistance heating system serves an entire building that
is not a high-rise residential or hotel/motel building; and has a conditioned floor area no greater than 5,000
square feet; and has no mechanical cooling; and is in an area where natural gas is not currently available.
EXCEPTION 6 to Section 140.4(g): heating systems serving as emergency backup to gas heating equipment.
(h) Heat Rejection Systems. Heat rejection equipment used in comfort cooling systems such as air-cooled
condensers, open cooling towers, closed-circuit cooling towers, and evaporative condensers shall include the
1. Fan Speed Control. Each fan powered by a motor of 7.5 hp (5.6 kW) or larger shall have the capability to
operate that fan at 2/3 of full speed or less, and shall have controls that automatically change the fan speed
to control the leaving fluid temperature or condensing temperature or pressure of the heat rejection device.
EXCEPTION 1 to Section 140.4(h)1: Heat rejection devices included as an integral part of the equipment
EXCEPTION 2 to Section 140.4(h)1: Condenser fans serving multiple refrigerant circuits.
EXCEPTION 3 to Section 140.4(h)1: Condenser fans serving flooded condensers.
EXCEPTION 4 to Section 140.4(h)1: Up to one third of the fans on a condenser or tower with multiple
fans where the lead fans comply with the speed control requirement.
2. Tower Flow Turndown. Open cooling towers configured with multiple condenser water pumps shall be
designed so that all cells can be run in parallel with the larger of:
A. The flow that is produced by the smallest pump; or
B. 50 percent of the design flow for the cell.
3. Limitation on Centrifugal Fan Cooling Towers. Open cooling towers with a combined rated capacity of
900 gpm and greater at 95°F condenser water return, 85°F condenser water supply, and 75°F outdoor wet-
bulb temperature, shall use propeller fans and shall not use centrifugal fans.
EXCEPTION 1 to Section 140.4(h)3: Cooling towers that are ducted (inlet or discharge) or have an
external sound trap that requires external static pressure capability.
EXCEPTION 2 to Section 140.4(h)3: Cooling towers that meet the energy efficiency requirement for
propeller fan towers in Section 110.2, TABLE 110.2-G.
SECTION 140.4 – PRESCRIPTIVE REQUIREMENTS FOR SPACE CONDITIONING SYSTEMS
Page 216 2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards
4. Multiple Cell Heat Rejection Equipment. Multiple cell heat rejection equipment with variable speed fan
A. Operate the maximum number of fans allowed that comply with the manufacturer’s requirements
for all system components, and
B. Control all operating fans to the same speed. Minimum fan speed shall comply with the minimum
allowable speed of the fan drive as specified by the manufactures recommendation. Staging of fans
is allowed once the fans are at their minimum operating speed.
5. Cooling tower efficiency. Axial fan, open-circuit cooling towers serving condenser water loops for chilled
water plants with a total of 900 gpm or greater, shall have a rated efficiency of no less than 60 gpm/hp when
rated in accordance with the conditions as listed in Table 110.2-G.
EXCEPTION 1 to Section 140.4(h)5: Replacement of existing cooling towers that are inside an existing
EXCEPTION 2 to Section 140.4(h)5: Cooling towers serving buildings in Climate Zone 1 or 16.
(i) Minimum Chiller Efficiency. Chillers shall meet or exceed Path B from TABLE 110.2-D
EXCEPTION 1 to Section 140.4(i): Chillers with electrical service > 600V.
EXCEPTION 2 to Section 140.4(i): Chillers attached to a heat recovery system with a design heat recovery
capacity > 40 percent of the design chiller cooling capacity.
EXCEPTION 3 to Section 140.4(i): Chillers used to charge thermal energy storage systems where the charging
EXCEPTION 4 to Section 140.4(i): In buildings with more than three chillers, only three chillers are required
(j) Limitation of Air-Cooled Chillers. Chilled water plants shall not have more than 300 tons provided by air-
EXCEPTION 1 to Section 140.4(j): Where the water quality at the building site fails to meet manufacturer’s
specifications for the use of water-cooled chillers.
EXCEPTION 2 to Section 140.4(j): Chillers that are used to charge a thermal energy storage system with a
design temperature of less than 40° F (4° C).
EXCEPTION 3 to Section 140.4(j): Systems serving healthcare facilities.
1. Hydronic Variable Flow Systems. HVAC chilled and hot water pumping shall be designed for variable
fluid flow and shall be capable of reducing pump flow rates to no more than the larger of: a) 50 percent or
less of the design flow rate; or b) the minimum flow required by the equipment manufacturer for the proper
operation of equipment served by the system.
EXCEPTION 1 to Section 140.4(k)1: Systems that include no more than three control valves.
EXCEPTION 2 to Section 140.4(k)1: Systems having a total pump system power less than or equal to 1.5
2. Chiller Isolation. When a chilled water system includes more than one chiller, provisions shall be made so
that flow through any chiller is automatically shut off when that chiller is shut off while still maintaining
flow through other operating chiller(s). Chillers that are piped in series for the purpose of increased
temperature differential shall be considered as one chiller.
3. Boiler Isolation. When a hot water plant includes more than one boiler, provisions shall be made so that
flow through any boiler is automatically shut off when that boiler is shut off while still maintaining flow
4. Chilled and Hot Water Temperature Reset Controls. Systems with a design capacity exceeding 500,000
Btu/hr supplying chilled or heated water shall include controls that automatically reset supply water
temperatures as a function of representative building loads or outside air temperature.
SECTION 140.4 – PRESCRIPTIVE REQUIREMENTS FOR SPACE CONDITIONING SYSTEMS
2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards Page 217
EXCEPTION 1 to Section 140.4(k)4: Hydronic systems that use variable flow to reduce pumping energy
EXCEPTION 2 to Section 140.4(k)4: Systems serving healthcare facilities.
5. Water-Cooled Air Conditioner and Hydronic Heat Pump Systems. Water circulation systems serving
water-cooled air conditioners, hydronic heat pumps, or both, that have total pump system power exceeding
5 hp shall have flow controls that meet the requirements of Section 140.4(k)6. Each such air conditioner or
heat pump shall have a two-position automatic valve interlocked to shut off water flow when the
A. Variable Speed Drives. Individual pumps serving variable flow systems and having a motor
horsepower exceeding 5 hp shall have controls or devices (such as variable speed control) that will
result in pump motor demand of no more than 30 percent of design wattage at 50 percent of design
water flow. The pumps shall be controlled as a function of required differential pressure.
B. Pressure Sensor Location and Setpoint.
i. For systems without direct digital control of individual coils reporting to the central control panel,
differential pressure shall be measured at the most remote heat exchanger or the heat exchanger
requiring the greatest differential pressure.
ii. For systems with direct digital control of individual coils with a central control panel, the static
pressure set point shall be reset based on the valve requiring the most pressure, and the setpoint
shall be no less than 80 percent open. Pressure sensors may be mounted anywhere.
EXCEPTION 1 to Section 140.4(k)6: Heating hot water systems.
EXCEPTION 2 to Section 140.4(k)6: Condenser water systems serving only water-cooled chillers.
7. Hydronic Heat Pump (WLHP) Controls. Hydronic heat pumps connected to a common heat pump water
loop with central devices for heat rejection and heat addition shall have controls that are capable of
providing a heat pump water supply temperature deadband of at least 20°F between initiation of heat
rejection and heat addition by the central devices.
EXCEPTION to Section 140.4(k)7: Where a system loop temperature optimization controller is used to
determine the most efficient operating temperature based on real-time conditions of demand and capacity,
deadbands of less than 20°F shall be allowed.
(l) Air Distribution System Duct Leakage Sealing. Duct systems shall be sealed in accordance with 1 or 2 below:
1. Systems serving high-rise residential buildings, hotel/motel buildings and nonresidential buildings other
than healthcare facilities, the duct system shall be sealed to a leakage rate not to exceed 6 percent of the
nominal air handler airflow rate as confirmed through field verification and diagnostic testing, in
accordance with the applicable procedures in Reference Nonresidential Appendices NA1 and NA2 if the
criteria in Subsections A, B and C below are met:
A. The duct system provides conditioned air to an occupiable space for a constant volume, single zone,
B. The space conditioning system serves less than 5,000 square feet of conditioned floor area; and
C. The combined surface area of the ducts located in the following spaces is more than 25 percent of the
total surface area of the entire duct system:
ii. In a space directly under a roof that
a. Has a U-factor greater than the U-factor of the ceiling, or if the roof does not meet the
b. Has fixed vents or openings to the outside or unconditioned spaces; or
SECTION 140.4 – PRESCRIPTIVE REQUIREMENTS FOR SPACE CONDITIONING SYSTEMS
Page 218 2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards
2. Duct systems serving healthcare facilities shall be sealed in accordance with the California Mechanical
(m) Fan Control. Each cooling system listed in TABLE 140.4-G shall be designed to vary the indoor fan airflow as
a function of load and shall comply with the following requirements:
1. DX and chilled water cooling systems that control the capacity of the mechanical cooling directly based on
occupied space temperature shall (i) have a minimum of 2 stages of fan control with no more than 66
percent speed when operating on stage 1; and (ii) draw no more than 40 percent of the fan power at full fan
2. All other systems, including but not limited to DX cooling systems and chilled water systems that control
the space temperature by modulating the airflow to the space, shall have proportional fan control such that
at 50 percent airflow the power draw is no more than 30 percent of the fan power at full fan speed.
3. Systems that include an air side economizer to meet 140.4(e)1 shall have a minimum of two speeds of fan
EXCEPTION 1 to Section 140.4(m): Modulating fan control is not required for chilled water systems with all
fan motors <1 HP, or for evaporative systems with all fan motors < 1 HP, if the systems are not used to provide
ventilation air and all indoor fans cycle with the load.
EXCEPTION 2 to Section 140.0(m): Systems serving healthcare facilities.
TABLE 140.4-G FAN CONTROL SYSTEMS
Cooling System Type Fan Motor Size Cooling Capacity
(n) Mechanical System Shut-off. Any directly conditioned space with operable wall or roof openings to the
outdoors shall be provided with interlock controls that disable or reset the temperature setpoint to 55°F for
mechanical heating and disable or reset the temperature setpoint to 90°F for mechanical cooling to that space
when any such opening is open for more than 5 minutes.
EXCEPTION 1 to Section 140.4(n): Interlocks are not required on doors with automatic closing devices.
EXCEPTION 2 to Section 140.4(n): Any space without a thermostatic control (thermostat or a space
temperature sensor used to control heating or cooling to the space).
EXCEPTION 4 to Section 140.4(n): High-rise residential dwelling units.
(o) Exhaust System Transfer Air. Conditioned supply air delivered to any space with mechanical exhaust shall not
1. The supply flow required to meet the space heating or cooling load; or
2. The ventilation rate required by the authority having jurisdiction, the facility Environmental Health and
3. The mechanical exhaust flow minus the available transfer air. Available transfer air shall be from another
conditioned space or return air plenums on the same floor and same smoke or fire compartment, and that at
their closest point are within 15 feet of each other.
EXCEPTION 1 to Section 140.4(o): Biosafety level classified laboratories 3 or higher.
SECTION 140.4 – PRESCRIPTIVE REQUIREMENTS FOR SPACE CONDITIONING SYSTEMS
2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards Page 219
EXCEPTION 3 to Section 140.4(o): Spaces that are required by applicable codes and standards to be
maintained at a positive pressure differential relative to adjacent spaces.
EXCEPTION 4 to Section 140.4(o): Spaces where the highest amount of transfer air that could be used for
exhaust makeup may exceed the available transfer airflow rate and where the spaces have a required negative
SECTION 140.4 – PRESCRIPTIVE REQUIREMENTS FOR SPACE CONDITIONING SYSTEMS
Page 220 2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards
SECTION 140.5 – PRESCRIPTIVE REQUIREMENTS FOR SERVICE
(a) Nonresidential Occupancies. A service water heating system installed in a nonresidential building complies
with this section if it complies with the applicable requirements of Sections 110.1, 110.3 and 120.3.
(b) High-Rise Residential and Hotel/Motel Occupancies. A service water heating system installed in a high-rise
residential or hotel/motel building complies with this section if it meets the requirements of Section 150.1(c)8.
SECTION 140.5 – PRESCRIPTIVE REQUIREMENTS FOR SERVICE WATER HEATING SYSTEMS
2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards Page 221
SECTION 140.6 – PRESCRIPTIVE REQUIREMENTS FOR INDOOR
A building complies with this section if:
i. The Calculation of Adjusted Indoor Lighting Power of all proposed building areas combined, calculated
under Subsection (a) is no greater than the Calculation of Allowed Indoor Lighting Power, Specific
Methodologies calculated under Subsection (c); and
ii. The Calculation of Allowed Indoor Lighting Power, General Rules comply with Subsection (b); and
iii. General lighting complies with the Automatic Daylighting Controls in Secondary Daylit Zone requirements
The prescriptive limits on indoor lighting power are the smaller of the Actual and Allowed Indoor Lighting Power
values determined in accordance with item i.
(a) Calculation of Adjusted Indoor Lighting Power. The adjusted indoor Lighting Power of all proposed building
areas is the total watts of all planned permanent and portable lighting systems in all areas of the proposed
building; subject to the applicable adjustments under Subdivisions 1 through 4 of this subsection and the
Exception to Section 140.6(a): Up to 0.3 watts per square foot of portable lighting for office areas shall not be
required to be included in the calculation of actual indoor lighting power.
1. Two interlocked lighting systems: No more than two lighting systems may be used for an area, and if there
are two they must be interlocked. Where there are two interlocked lighting systems, the watts of the lower
wattage system may be excluded from the Adjusted Indoor Lighting Power if:
A. An Installation Certificate detailing compliance with Section 140.6(a)1 is submitted in accordance with
B. The area or areas served by the interlocking systems is an auditorium, a convention center, a conference
C. The two lighting systems are interlocked with a Nonprogrammable Double-Throw Switch to prevent
For compliance with Part 6 a Nonprogrammable Double-Throw Switch is an electrical switch
commonly called a "single pole double throw" or "three-way" switch that is wired as a selector switch
allowing one of two loads to be enabled. It can be a line voltage switch or a low voltage switch
selecting between two relays. It cannot be overridden or changed in any manner that would permit both
2. Reduction of wattage through controls. In calculating Adjusted Indoor Lighting Power, the installed watts
of a luminaire providing general lighting in an area listed in TABLE 140.6-A may be reduced by the
product of (i) the number of watts controlled as described in TABLE 140.6-A, times (ii) the applicable
Power Adjustment Factor (PAF), if all of the following conditions are met:
A. An Installation Certificate is submitted in accordance with Section 130.4(b); and
B. Luminaires and controls meet the applicable requirements of Section 110.9, and Sections 130.0 through
C. The controlled lighting is permanently installed general lighting systems and the controls are
permanently installed nonresidential-rated lighting controls.
When used for determining PAFs for general lighting in offices, furniture mounted luminaires that
comply with all of the following conditions shall qualify as permanently installed general lighting
i. The furniture mounted luminaires shall be permanently installed no later than the time of building
ii. The furniture mounted luminaires shall be permanently hardwired; and
SECTION 140.6 – PRESCRIPTIVE REQUIREMENTS FOR INDOOR LIGHTING
Page 222 2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards
iii. The furniture mounted lighting system shall be designed to provide indirect general lighting; and
iv. Before multiplying the installed watts of the furniture mounted luminaire by the applicable PAF,
0.3watts per square foot of the area illuminated by the furniture mounted luminaires shall be
subtracted from installed watts of the furniture mounted luminaires; and
v. The lighting control for the furniture mounted luminaire complies with all other applicable
D. At least 50 percent of the light output of the controlled luminaire is within the applicable area listed in
TABLE 140.6-A. Luminaires on lighting tracks shall be within the applicable area in order to qualify
E. Only one PAF from TABLE 140.6-A may be used for each qualifying luminaire. PAFs shall not be
added together unless allowed in TABLE 140.6-A.
F. Only lighting wattage directly controlled in accordance with Section 140.6(a)2 shall be used to reduce
the installed watts as allowed by Section 140.6(a)2 for calculating the Adjusted Indoor Lighting Power.
If only a portion of the wattage in a luminaire is controlled in accordance with Section 140.6(a)2, then
only that portion of controlled wattage may be reduced in calculating Adjusted Indoor Lighting Power.
G. Lighting controls used to qualify for a PAF shall be designed and installed in addition to manual,
multilevel, and automatic lighting controls required in Section 130.1, and in addition to any other
lighting controls required by any provision of Part 6. PAFs shall not be available for lighting controls
H. To qualify for the PAF for daylight dimming plus OFF control, the daylight control and controlled
luminaires shall comply with Section 130.1(d), 130.4(a)3 and 130.4(a)7, and shall additionally turn
lights completely OFF when the daylight available in the daylit zone is greater than 150 percent of the
illuminance received from the general lighting system at full power. The PAF shall apply only to the
luminaires in the primary sidelit daylit zone and the skylit daylit zone.
I. To qualify for the PAF for an occupant sensing control controlling the general lighting in large open
plan office areas above workstations, in accordance with TABLE 140.6-A, the following requirements
i. The open plan office area shall be greater than 250 square feet; and
ii. This PAF shall be available only in office areas which contain workstations; and
iii. Controlled luminaires shall only be those that provide general lighting directly above the controlled
area, or furniture mounted luminaires that comply with Section 140.6(a)2 and provide general
lighting directly above the controlled area; and
iv. Qualifying luminaires shall be controlled by occupant sensing controls that meet all of the
a. Infrared sensors shall be equipped by the manufacturer, of fitted in the field by the installer,
with lenses or shrouds to prevent them from being triggered by movement outside of the
b. Ultrasonic sensors shall be tuned to reduce their sensitivity to prevent them from being
triggered by movements outside of the controlled area.
c. All other sensors shall be installed and adjusted as necessary to prevent them from being
triggered by movements outside of the controlled area.
J. To qualify for the PAF for an Institutional Tuning in TABLE 140.6-A, the tuned lighting system shall
comply with all of the following requirements:
i. The lighting controls shall limit the maximum output or maximum power draw of the controlled
lighting to 85 percent or less of full light output or full power draw; and
ii. The means of setting the limit is accessible only to authorized personnel; and
iii. The setting of the limit is verified by the acceptance test required by Section 130.4(a)7; and
SECTION 140.6 – PRESCRIPTIVE REQUIREMENTS FOR INDOOR LIGHTING
2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards Page 223
iv. The construction documents specify which lighting systems shall have their maximum light output
or maximum power draw set to no greater than 85% of full light output or full power draw.
K. To qualify for the PAF for a Demand Responsive Control in TABLE 140.6-A, a Demand Responsive
Control shall meet all of the following requirements:
i. The building shall be 10,000 square feet or smaller; and
ii. The controlled lighting shall be capable of being automatically reduced in response to a demand
iii. Lighting shall be reduced in a manner consistent with uniform level of illumination requirements
iv. Spaces that are nonhabitable shall not be used to comply with this requirement, and spaces with a
lighting power density of less than 0.5 watts per square foot shall not be counted toward the
L.To qualify for the PAFs for clerestory fenestration, horizontal slats, or light shelves in TABLE 140.6-A,
the daylighting design shall meet the requirements in Section 140.3(d). The PAFs shall only apply to
lighting in a primary or secondary sidelit daylit zone where continuous dimming daylighting controls
meeting the requirements of Section 130.1(d) are installed.
3. Lighting wattage excluded. The watts of the following indoor lighting applications may be excluded from
Adjusted Indoor Lighting Power. (Indoor lighting not listed below shall comply with all applicable
nonresidential indoor lighting requirements in Part 6.):
A. In theme parks: Lighting for themes and special effects.
B. Studio lighting for film or photography provided that these lighting systems are in addition to and
separately switched from a general lighting system.
C. Lighting for dance floors, lighting for theatrical and other live performances, and theatrical lighting
used for religious worship, provided that these lighting systems are additions to a general lighting
system and are separately controlled by a multiscene or theatrical cross-fade control station accessible
Lighting intended for makeup, hair, and costume preparation in performing arts facility dressing rooms,
provided that the lighting is separately switched from the general lighting system, switched
independently at each dressing station, and is controlled with a Vacancy Sensor.
D. In civic facilities, transportation facilities, convention centers, and hotel function areas: Lighting for
temporary exhibits, if the lighting is in addition to a general lighting system and is separately controlled
from a panel accessible only to authorized operators.
E. Lighting installed by the manufacturer in walk-in coolers or freezers, vending machines, food
preparation equipment, and scientific and industrial equipment.
F. In office buildings with medical and clinical areas and healthcare facilities: Examination and surgical
lights, low-ambient night-lights, and lighting integral to medical equipment, provided that these
lighting systems are additions to and separately switched from a general lighting system.
G. Lighting for plant growth or maintenance, if it is controlled by a multilevel astronomical time-switch
control that complies with the applicable provisions of Section 110.9.
H. Lighting equipment that is for sale.
I. Lighting demonstration equipment in lighting education facilities.
J. Lighting that is required for exit signs subject to the CBC. Exit signs shall meet the requirements of the
K. Exitway or egress illumination that is normally off and that is subject to the CBC.
L. In hotel/motel buildings: Lighting in guest rooms (lighting in hotel/motel guest rooms shall comply
with Section 130.0(b). (Indoor lighting not in guest rooms shall comply with all applicable
nonresidential lighting requirements in Part 6.)
SECTION 140.6 – PRESCRIPTIVE REQUIREMENTS FOR INDOOR LIGHTING
Page 224 2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards
M. In high-rise residential buildings: Lighting in dwelling units (Lighting in high-rise residential dwelling
units shall comply with Section 130.0(b).) (Indoor lighting not in dwelling units shall comply with all
applicable nonresidential lighting requirements in Part 6.)
N. Temporary lighting systems. (As defined in Section 100.1.)
O. Lighting in occupancy group U buildings less than 1,000 square feet.
P. Lighting in unconditioned agricultural buildings less than 2,500 square feet.
Q. Lighting systems in qualified historic buildings, as defined in the California Historical Building Code
(Title 24, Part 8), are exempt from the Lighting Power Density allowances, if they consist solely of
historic lighting components or replicas of historic lighting components. If lighting systems in qualified
buildings contain some historic lighting components or replicas of historic components, combined with
other lighting components, only those historic or historic replica components are exempt. All other
lighting systems in qualified historic buildings shall comply with the Lighting Power Density
R. Lighting in nonresidential parking garages for seven or less vehicles: Lighting in nonresidential parking
garages for seven or less vehicles shall comply with the applicable residential parking garage
S. Lighting for signs: Lighting for signs shall comply with Section 140.8.
T. Lighting in refrigerated cases less than 3,000 square feet. (Lighting in refrigerated cases less than 3,000
square feet shall comply with the Title 20 Appliance Efficiency Regulations).
U. Lighting in elevators where the lighting meets the requirements in Section 120.6(f).
V. Lighting connected to a Life Safety Branch or Critical Branch, as specified in Section 517 of the
4. Luminaire Classification and Power Adjustment.
A. Luminaire Classification and Power shall be determined in accordance with Section 130.0(c).
B. Small Aperture Tunable-White and Dim-to-Warm Luminaires Lighting Power Adjustment. For
qualifying small aperture tunable-white and dim-to-warm LED luminaires, the adjusted indoor lighting
power of these luminaires shall be calculated by multiplying their maximum rated wattage by 0.75.
Qualifying luminaires shall meet all of the following:
i. Small Aperture. Qualifying luminaires longer than 18 inches shall be no wider than four inches.
Qualifying luminaires with a length of 18 inches or less shall be no wider than eight inches.
ii. Color Changing. Qualifying tunable-white luminaires shall be capable of a color change greater
than or equal to 2000 Kelvin correlated color temperature (CCT). Qualifying dim-to-warm
luminaires shall be capable of color change greater than or equal to 500 Kelvin CCT.
iii. Controls. Qualifying luminaires shall be connected to controls that allows color changing of the
C. Tailored Method Display Lighting Mounting Height Lighting Power Adjustment. For wall display
luminaires or floor display luminaires meeting Tailored Method Section 140.6(c)3G and H and where
the bottom of luminaires are 10 feet 7 inches and greater above the finished floor, the adjusted indoor
lighting power of these luminaires shall be calculated by multiplying their maximum rated wattage and
the appropriated mounting height adjustment factor from TABLE 140.6-E. Luminaire mounting height
is the distance from the finished floor to the bottom of the luminaire. General lighting shall not qualify
SECTION 140.6 – PRESCRIPTIVE REQUIREMENTS FOR INDOOR LIGHTING
2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards Page 225
(b) Calculation of Allowed Indoor Lighting Power: General Rules
1. The allowed indoor lighting power allotment for conditioned areas shall be calculated separately from the
allowed Lighting Power allotment for unconditioned areas. Each allotment is applicable solely to the area to
which it applies, and there shall be no trade-offs between conditioned and unconditioned area allotments.
2. allowed indoor lighting power allotment shall be calculated separately from the allowed Outdoor Lighting
Power allotment. Each allotment is applicable solely to the area to which it applies, and there shall be no
trade-offs between the separate Indoor and Outdoor allotments.
3. The allowed indoor lighting power allotment for general lighting shall be calculated as follows:
A. The Complete Building Method, as described in Section 140.6(c)1, shall be used only for an entire
building, except as permitted by Section 140.6(c)1. As described more fully in Section 140.6(c)1, and
subject to the adjustments listed there, the Allowed Indoor Lighting Power allotment for general
lighting for the entire building shall be calculated as follows:
i. For a conditioned building, the product of the square feet of conditioned space of the building
times the applicable allotment of watts per square foot described in TABLE 140.6-B.
ii. For an unconditioned building, the product of the square foot of unconditioned space of the
building times the applicable allotment of watts per square feet described in TABLE 140.6-B.
B. The Area Category Method, as described in Section 140.6(c)2, shall be used either by itself for all areas
in the building, or when some areas in the building use the Tailored Method described in Section
140.6(c)3. Under the Area Category Method (either by itself or in conjunction with the Tailored
Method), as described more fully in Section 140.6(c)2, and subject to the adjustments listed there, the
allowed Indoor Lighting Power allotment for general lighting shall be calculated for each area in the
i. For conditioned areas, by multiplying the conditioned square feet of the area times the applicable
allotment of watts per square foot for the area shown in TABLE 140.6-C (or TABLE 140.6-D if
the Tailored Method is used for that area).
ii. For unconditioned areas, by multiplying the unconditioned square feet of the area times the
applicable allotment of watts per square foot for the area shown in TABLE 140.6-C (or TABLE
140.6-D if the Tailored Method is used for that area).
The allowed indoor lighting power allotment for general lighting for one area for which the Area
Category Method was used may be increased up to the amount that the allowed indoor lighting power
allotment for general lighting for another area using the Area Category Method or Tailored Method is
decreased, except that such increases and decreases shall not be made between conditioned and
C. The Tailored Method, as described in Section 140.6(c)3, shall be used either by itself for all areas in the
building, or when some areas in the building use the Area Category Method described in Section
140.6(c)2. Under the Tailored Method (either by itself or in conjunction with the Area Category
Method) as described more fully in Section 140.6(c)3, and subject to the adjustments listed there,
allowed Indoor Lighting Power allotment for general lighting shall be calculated for each area in the
i. For conditioned areas, by multiplying the conditioned square feet of the area times the applicable
allotment of watts per square foot for the area shown in TABLE 140.6-D (or TABLE 140.6-C if
the Area Category Method is used for that area);
ii For unconditioned areas, by multiplying the unconditioned square feet of the area times the
applicable allotment of watts per square foot for the area shown in TABLE 140.6-D (or TABLE
140.6-C if the Area Category Method is used for that area);
The allowed indoor lighting power allotment for general lighting for one area for which the Tailored
Method was used may be increased up to the amount that the allowed indoor power lighting for general
lighting for another area is decreased, but only if the Tailored Method or Area Category Method was
used for the other area, except that such increases and decreases shall not be made between conditioned
SECTION 140.6 – PRESCRIPTIVE REQUIREMENTS FOR INDOOR LIGHTING
Page 226 2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards
D. If the Area Category Method is used for an area, the Tailored Method may not be used for that area. If
the Tailored Method is used for an area, the Area Category Method may not be used for that area.
4.Allowed Indoor Lighting Power allotments for all lighting power allotments other than general lighting shall be
A. When using the Area Category Method, allowed Indoor Lighting Power allotments for specialized task
work; ornamental; precision commercial and industrial work; white board or chalk board; accent,
display and feature; decorative; or Videoconferencing Studio; may not be increased as a result of, or
otherwise traded off against, decreasing any other allotment; and
B. When using the Tailored Method, allowed indoor lighting power allotments for wall display; floor
display and task; ornamental/special effect; or very valuable display case; may not be increased, or
otherwise traded between any of the separate allotments.
(c) Calculation of Allowed Indoor Lighting Power: Specific Methodologies. The allowed indoor lighting power
for each building type, or each primary function area shall be calculated using only one of the methods in
1. Complete Building Method. Requirements for using the Complete Building Method include all of the
A. The Complete Building Method shall be used only for building types, as defined in Section 100.1, that
are specifically listed in TABLE 140.6-B. (For example, retail and wholesale stores, hotel/motel, and
high-rise residential buildings shall not use this method.)
B. The Complete Building Method shall be used only on projects involving:
i. Entire buildings with one type of use occupancy; or
ii. Mixed occupancy buildings where one type of use makes up at least 90 percent of the entire
building (in which case, when applying the Complete Building Method, it shall be assumed that the
primary use is 100 percent of the building); or
iii. A tenant space where one type of use makes up at least 90 percent of the entire tenant space (in
which case, when applying the Complete Building Method, it shall be assumed that the primary use
C. The Complete Building Method shall be used only when the applicant is applying for a lighting permit
and submits plans and specifications for the entire building or the entire tenant space.
D. Under the Complete Building Method, the allowed indoor lighting power allotment is the Lighting
Power Density value times the floor area of the entire building.
E. For buildings including a parking garage plus another type of use listed in TABLE 140.6-B, the parking
garage portion of the building and other type of use portion of the building shall each separately use the
2. Area Category Method. Requirements for using the Area Category Method include all of the following:
A. The Area Category Method shall be used only for primary function areas, as defined in Section 100.1,
that are listed in TABLE 140.6-C. For primary function areas not listed, selection of a reasonably
B. Primary function areas in TABLE 140.6-C shall not apply to a complete building. Each primary
function area shall be determined as a separate area.
C. For purposes of compliance with Section 140.6(c)2, an "area" shall be defined as all contiguous areas
that accommodate or are associated with a single primary function area listed in TABLE 140.6-C.
D. Where areas are bounded or separated by interior partitions, the floor area occupied by those interior
partitions may be included in a primary function area.
E. If at the time of permitting for a newly constructed building, a tenant is not identified for a multitenant
area, a maximum of 0.4 watts per square foot shall be allowed for the lighting in each area in which a
tenant has not been identified. The area shall be classified as unleased tenant area.
SECTION 140.6 – PRESCRIPTIVE REQUIREMENTS FOR INDOOR LIGHTING
2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards Page 227
F. Under the Area Category Method, the allowed indoor lighting power for each primary function area is
the Lighting Power Density value in TABLE 140.6-C times the square feet of the primary function
area. The total allowed indoor lighting power density for the building is the sum of all allowed indoor
lighting power densities for all areas in the building.
G. In addition to the allowed indoor lighting power calculated according to Sections 140.6(c)2A through
F, the building may add additional lighting power allowances for qualifying lighting systems as
specified in the Qualifying Lighting Systems column in TABLE 140.6-C under the following
i. Only primary function areas having a lighting system as specified in the Qualifying Lighting
Systems column in TABLE 140.6-C and in accordance with the corresponding footnote of the
TABLE shall qualify for the additional lighting power allowances; and
ii. The additional lighting power allowances shall be used only if the plans clearly identify all
applicable task areas and the lighting equipment designed to illuminate these tasks; and
iii. Tasks that are performed less than two hours per day or poor quality tasks that can be improved are
not eligible for the additional lighting power allowances; and
iv. The additional lighting power allowances shall not utilize any type of luminaires that are used for
general lighting in the building; and
v. The additional lighting power allowances shall not be used when using the Complete Building
Method, or when the Tailored Method is used for any area in the building; and
vi. The additional lighting power allowed is the smaller of:
a. the lighting power density listed in the “Allowed Additional Lighting LPD” column in
TABLE 140.6-C, times the square feet of the primary function, or
b. the Adjusted Indoor Lighting Power of the applicable lighting; and
vii. In addition to all other additional lighting power allowed under Sections 140.6(c)2Gi through vi,
up to 1.0 watts per square foot of additional lighting power shall be allowed in a videoconferencing
studio, as defined in Section 100.1, provided the following conditions are met:
a. A completed and signed Installation Certificate is prepared and submitted in accordance with
Section 130.4(b), specifically detailing compliance with the applicable requirements of
b. The Videoconferencing Studio is a room with permanently installed videoconferencing
cameras, audio equipment, and playback equipment for both audio-based and video-based
two-way communication between local and remote sites; and
c. General lighting is switched in accordance with TABLE 130.1-A; and
d. Wall wash lighting is separately switched from the general lighting system; and
e. All of the lighting in the studio, including general lighting and additional lighting power
allowed by Section 140.6(c)2Gvii is controlled by a multiscene programmable control system
(also known as a scene preset control system).
3. Tailored Method. Requirements for using the Tailored Method include all of the following:
A. The Tailored Method shall be used only for primary function areas listed in TABLE 140.6-D, as
B. Allowed Indoor Lighting Power allotments for general lighting shall be determined according to
C. For compliance with Section 140.6(c)3, an "area" shall be defined as all contiguous areas that
accommodate or are associated with a single primary function area listed in TABLE 140.6-D.
D. Where areas are bounded or separated by interior partitions, the floor area occupied by those interior
partitions may be included in a Primary Function Area.
SECTION 140.6 – PRESCRIPTIVE REQUIREMENTS FOR INDOOR LIGHTING
Page 228 2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards
E. In addition to the allowed indoor lighting power allotments for general lighting calculated according to
Sections 140.6(c)3F, as applicable, the building may add additional lighting power allowances for wall
display lighting, floor display lighting and task lighting, ornamental/special effects lighting, and very
valuable display cases lighting according to Sections 140.6(c)3G through J.
F. Determine allowed indoor lighting power allotments for general lighting for primary function areas
i. Use the General Illumination Level (Lux) listed in Column 2 of Table 140.6-D to determine the
Allowed General Lighting Power Density allotments for the area.
ii. Determine the room cavity ratio (RCR) for the area. The RCR shall be calculated according to the
iii. Find the allowed General Lighting Power Density allotments in TABLE 140.6-G that is applicable
to the General Illuminance Level (Lux) from Column 2 of Table 140.6-D (as described in Item i.)
and the RCR determined in accordance with TABLE 140.6-F (as described in Item ii).
iv. Determine the square feet of the area in accordance with Section 140.6(c)3C and D.
v. Multiply the allowed Lighting Power Density allotment, as determined in accordance with Item iii
by the square feet of each primary function area, as determined in accordance with Item iv. The
product is the allowed indoor lighting power allotment for general lighting for the area.
G. Determine additional allowed power for wall display lighting according to column 3 of Table 140.6-D
for each primary function area as follows:
i. Floor displays shall not qualify for wall display allowances.
a. Be mounted within 10 feet of the wall having the wall display. When track lighting is used for
wall display, and where portions of that lighting track are more than 10 feet from the wall and
other portions are within 10 feet of the wall, portions of track more than 10 feet from the wall
shall not be used for the wall display allowance.
b. Be a lighting system type appropriate for wall lighting. Lighting systems appropriate for wall
lighting are lighting track adjacent to the wall, wall-washer luminaires, luminaires behind a
wall valance or wall cove, or accent light. (Accent luminaires are adjustable or fixed
luminaires with PAR, R, MR, AR, or luminaires providing directional display light.)
iii. Additional allowed power for wall display lighting is available only for lighting that illuminates
walls having wall displays. The length of display walls shall include the length of the perimeter
walls, including but not limited to closable openings and permanent full height interior partitions.
Permanent full height interior partitions are those that (I) extend from the floor to within two feet
of the ceiling or are taller than ten feet and (II) are permanently anchored to the floor.
iv. For wall display lighting where the bottom of the luminaire is greater than 10 feet 6 inches above
the finished floor, the mounting height adjustment factor from Table 140.6-E can be used to adjust
the installed luminaire wattage as specified in Section 140.6(a)4C.
v. The allowed power for wall display lighting shall be the smaller of:
a. the “wall display lighting power density” determined in accordance with TABLE 140.6-D,
multiplied by the wall display lengths determined in accordance with Item iii; and
b. The Adjusted Indoor Lighting Power used for the wall display lighting systems.
vi. Lighting internal to display cases that are attached to a wall or directly adjacent to a wall are
counted as wall display lighting as specified in Section 140.6(c)3G. All other lighting internal to
display cases are counted as floor display lighting as specified in Section 140.6(c)3H, or as very
valuable display case lighting as specified in Section 140.6(c)3J.
H. Determine additional allowed power for floor display lighting and task lighting as follows:
i. Displays that are installed against a wall shall not qualify for the floor display lighting power
SECTION 140.6 – PRESCRIPTIVE REQUIREMENTS FOR INDOOR LIGHTING
2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards Page 229
ii. Lighting internal to display cases that are not attached to a wall and not directly adjacent to a wall
shall be counted as floor display lighting in accordance with Section 140.6(c)3H; or very valuable
display case lighting in accordance with Section 140.6(c)3J.
iii. Additional allowed power for floor display lighting, and additional allowed power for task lighting,
may be used by qualifying floor display lighting systems, qualifying task lighting systems, or a
combination of both. For floor areas qualifying for both floor display and task lighting power
allowances, the additional allowed power shall be used only once for the same floor area, so that
the allowance shall not be additive.
iv. Qualifying floor display lighting shall:
a. Be mounted no closer than 2 feet to a wall.
b. Consist of only (I) directional lamp types, such as PAR, R, MR, AR; or (II) luminaires
c. If track lighting is used, shall be only track heads that are classified as direction lighting types.
a. Be located immediately adjacent to and capable of illuminating the task for which it is
b. Be of a type different from the general lighting system.
c. Be separately switched from the general lighting system.
vi. If there are illuminated floor displays, floor display lighting power shall be used only if allowed by
vii. The square footage of floor displays or the square footage of task areas shall be determined in
accordance with Section 140.6(c)3C and D, except that any floor area designed to not have floor
displays or tasks, such as floor areas designated as a path of egress, shall not be included for the
viii.For floor display lighting where the bottom of the luminaire is greater than 10.6 feet above the
finished floor, multiply the floor display installed watts by the appropriate mounting height
adjustment factor from Table 140.6-E to calculate the Adjusted Indoor Lighting Power as specified
ix. The allowed power for floor display lighting for each applicable area shall be the smaller of:
a. The allowed floor display and task lighting power determined in accordance with Section
140.6(c)3Hvi multiplied by the floor square footage determined in accordance with Section
b. The Adjusted Indoor Lighting Power used for the floor display lighting systems.
I. Determine additional allowed power for ornamental/special effects lighting as follows:
i. Qualifying ornamental lighting includes luminaires such as chandeliers, sconces, lanterns, neon
and cold cathode, light emitting diodes, theatrical projectors, moving lights and light color panels,
when any of those lights are used in a decorative manner that does not serve as display lighting or
ii. Additional lighting power for ornamental/special effects lighting shall be used only if allowed by
iii. Additional lighting power for ornamental/special effects lighting shall be used only in areas having
ornamental/special effects lighting. The square footage of the floor area shall be determined in
accordance with Section 140.6(c)3C and D, and it shall not include floor areas not having
iv. The additional allowed power for ornamental/special effects lighting for each applicable area shall
SECTION 140.6 – PRESCRIPTIVE REQUIREMENTS FOR INDOOR LIGHTING
Page 230 2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards
a. The product of the “allowed ornamental/special effects lighting power” determined in
accordance with Section 140.6(c)3Iii, multiplied by the floor square footage determined in
accordance with Section 140.6(c)3Iiii; and
b. The Adjusted Indoor Lighting Power of allowed ornamental/special effects lighting.
J. Determine additional allowed power for very valuable display case lighting as follows:
i. Additional allowed power for very valuable display case lighting shall be available only for display
cases in appropriate function areas in retail merchandise sales, museum and religious worship.
ii. To qualify for additional allowed power for very valuable display case lighting, a case shall
contain jewelry, coins, fine china, fine crystal, precious stones, silver, small art objects and
artifacts, and/or valuable collections the display of which involves customer inspection of very fine
detail from outside of a locked case.
iii. Qualifying lighting includes internal display case lighting or external lighting employing highly
directional luminaires specifically designed to illuminate the case or inspection area without spill
light, and shall not be fluorescent lighting unless installed inside of a display case.
iv. If there is qualifying very valuable display case lighting, in accordance with Section 140.6(c)3Jii,
the smallest of the following separate lighting power for display cases presenting very valuable
a. The product of the area of the primary function and 0.55 watt per square foot; or
b. The product of the area of the display case and 8 watts per square foot; or
c. The Adjusted Indoor Lighting Power of lighting for very valuable displays.
(d) Automatic Daylighting Controls in Secondary Daylit Zones. All luminaires providing general lighting that is
in, or partially in a Secondary Sidelit Daylit Zone, and that is not in a Primary Sidelit Daylit Zone shall:
1. Be controlled independently from all other luminaires by automatic daylighting controls that meet the applicable
2. Be controlled in accordance with the applicable requirements in Section 130.1(d); and
3. All Secondary Sidelit Daylit Zones shall be shown on the plans submitted to the enforcing agency.
EXCEPTION 1 to Section 140.6(d): Luminaires in Secondary Sidelit Daylit Zone(s) in an enclosed space in which
the combined total general lighting power in Secondary Daylit Zone(s) is less than 120 watts, or where the
combined total general lighting power in Primary and Secondary Daylit Zone(s) is less than 240 watts.
EXCEPTION 2 to Section 140.6(d): Luminaires in parking garages complying with Section 130.1(d)3.
EXCEPTION 3 to Section 140.6(d): Areas adjacent to vertical glazing below an overhang, where there is no
vertical glazing above the overhang and where the ratio of the overhang projection to the overhang rise is greater
than 1.5 for South, East and West orientations, or where the ratio of the overhang projection to the overhang rise
is greater than 1 for North orientations.
EXCEPTION 4 to Section 140.6(d): Rooms that have a total glazing area of less than 24 square feet, or
parking garage areas with a combined total of less than 36 square feet of glazing or opening.
EXCEPTION 5 to Section 140.6(d): Luminaires in sidelit daylit zones in retail merchandise sales and wholesale
SECTION 140.6 – PRESCRIPTIVE REQUIREMENTS FOR INDOOR LIGHTING
2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards Page 231
TABLE 140.6-A LIGHTING POWER ADJUSTMENT FACTORS (PAF)
TYPE OF CONTROL TYPE OF AREA FACTOR
a.To qualify for any of the Power Adjustment Factors in this table, the installation shall comply with the applicable requirements in
b.Only one PAF may be used for each qualifying luminaire unless combined below.
c.Lighting controls that are required for compliance with Part 6 shall not be eligible for a PAF
1.Daylight Dimming plus OFF Control Luminaires in skylit daylit zone or primary sidelit daylit zone 0.10
No larger than 125 square feet 0.40
square feet: One sensor From 126 to 250 square feet 0.30
Luminaires that qualify for other PAFs in this table may also 0.10
qualify for this tuning PAF.
Luminaires that qualify for other PAFs in this table may also 0.05
qualify for this tuning PAF.
All building types of 10,000 square feet or smaller.
4.Demand Responsive Control Luminaires that qualify for other PAFs in this table may also 0.05
qualify for this demand responsive control PAF
Luminaires in daylit areas adjacent to the clerestory.
5. Clerestory Fenestration Luminaires that qualify for daylight dimming plus OFF control may 0.05
also qualify for this PAF.
Luminaires in daylit areas adjacent to vertical fenestration with
Luminaires that qualify for daylight dimming plus OFF control may
also qualify for this PAF.
Luminaires in daylit areas adjacent to clerestory fenestration with
interior or exterior light shelves. This PAF may be combined with
7.Light Shelves the PAF for clerestory fenestration. 0.10
Luminaires that qualify for daylight dimming plus OFF control
may also qualify for this PAF
TABLE 140.6-B COMPLETE BUILDING METHOD LIGHTING POWER DENSITY VALUES
ALLOWED LIGHTING POWER DENSITY
Motion Picture Theater Building 0.70
Performing Arts Theater Building 0.80
SECTION 140.6 – PRESCRIPTIVE REQUIREMENTS FOR INDOOR LIGHTING
Page 232 2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards
TABLE 140.6-C AREA CATEGORY METHOD - LIGHTING POWER DENSITY VALUES (WATTS/FT²)
Primary Function Area for General Qualified Lighting Allowance (W/ft²,
Lighting Systems unless noted
Auto Repair / Maintenance Area 0.55 Detailed Task Work7 0.20
Audience Seating Area 0.60 Ornamental 0.30
Beauty Salon Area Detailed Task Work7 0.20
Civic Meeting Place Area 1.00 Ornamental 0.30
Classroom, Lecture, Training, Vocational Area 0.70 White or Chalk Board1 4.50 W/ft
Convention, Conference, Multipurpose and Meeting Area 0.85 Ornamental 0.30
Dining Area Bar/Lounge and Fine
Electrical, Mechanical, Telephone Rooms 0.40 Detailed Task Work7 0.20
Exercise/Fitness Center and Gymnasium Area 0.50 - -
Hotel Function Area 0.85 Ornamental 0.30
Museum Area Accent, display and
Restoration Room 0.75 Detailed Task Work7 0.20
Financial Transaction Area 0.80 Ornamental 0.30
General/Commercial & Industrial Low Bay 0.60 Detailed Task Work7 0.20
High Bay 0.65 Detailed Task Work7 0.20
Library Reading Area 0.80 Ornamental 0.30
Main Entry Lobby 0.85 Ornamental 0.30
Concourse and Atria Area 0.90 Ornamental 0.30
Office Area >250 square feet 0.65
Parking Garage Area First ATM 100 W
SECTION 140.6 – PRESCRIPTIVE REQUIREMENTS FOR INDOOR LIGHTING
2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards Page 233
Pharmacy Area Specialized Task
Retail Sales Area Accent, display and
Theater Area Motion picture 0.60
Scientific Laboratory Area Specialized Task
Healthcare Facility and Hospitals Exam/Treatment Room 1.15 - -
Patient Room 0.55 Tunable white or dim-
Religious Worship Area 0.95 Ornamental 0.30
Transportation Function Baggage Area 0.40 - -
Sports Arena – Playing Area Class I Facility13 2.25 - -
SECTION 140.6 – PRESCRIPTIVE REQUIREMENTS FOR INDOOR LIGHTING
Page 234 2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards
Main Entry Lobby 0.85 Transition Lighting
Religious Worship Area 1.00 Ornamental 0.30
Footnotes for this table are listed below.
1.White board or chalk board. – Directional lighting dedicated to a white board or chalk board.
2.Daylight Adaptation Zones shall be no longer than 66 feet from the entrance to the parking garage.
3.Accent, display and feature lighting – luminaires shall be adjustable or directional.
4.Decorative lighting – primary function shall be decorative and not to provide general lighting.
5.Illuminated mirrors. Lighting shall be dedicated to the mirror.
6.Portable lighting in office areas includes under shelf or furniture-mounted supplemental task lighting qualifies when controlled by a
7.Detailed task work – Lighting provides high level of visual acuity required for activities with close attention to small elements and/or
8.Specialized task work – Lighting provides for small-scale, cognitive or fast performance visual tasks; lighting required for operating
specialized equipment associated with pharmaceutical/laboratorial activities.
9.Precision specialized work – Lighting for work performed within a commercial or industrial environment that entails working with
low contrast, finely detailed, or fast moving objects.
10.Tunable white luminaires capable of color change greater than or equal to 2000K CCT, or dim-to-warm luminaires capable of color
change greater than or equal to 500K CCT, connected to controls that allows color changing of the luminaires.
11.Aging Eye/Low-vision areas can be documented as being designed to comply with the light levels in ANSI/IES RP-28 and are or
will be licensed by local or state authorities for either senior long-term care, adult day care, senior support, and/or people with special
12.Transition lighting OFF at night. Lighting power controlled by astronomical time clock or other control to shut off lighting at night.
Additional LPD only applies to area within 30 feet of an exit. Not applicable to lighting in daylit zones.
13. Class I Facility is used for competition play for 5000 or more spectators. Class II Facility is used for competition play for up to
5000 spectators. Class III Facility is used for competition play for up to 2000 spectators. Class IV Facility is normally used for
recreational play and there is limited or no provision for spectators.
SECTION 140.6 – PRESCRIPTIVE REQUIREMENTS FOR INDOOR LIGHTING
2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards Page 235
TABLE 140.6-D TAILORED METHOD LIGHTING POWER ALLOWANCES
General Lighting Floor Display Allowed Ornamental/
Primary Function Area Illumination Power Power and Special Effect Lighting
Level (Lux) Density Task Lighting Power Density (W/ft²)
TABLE 140.6-E TAILORED WALL AND FLOOR DISPLAY MOUNTING HEIGHT ADJUSTMENT
Height in feet above finished floor and bottom of
Floor Display or Wall Display Mounting Height Adjustment Factor
SECTION 140.6 – PRESCRIPTIVE REQUIREMENTS FOR INDOOR LIGHTING
Page 236 2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards
TABLE 140.6-F ROOM CAVITY RATIO (RCR) EQUATIONS
Determine the Room Cavity Ratio for TABLE 140.6-G using one of the following equations.
Room cavity ratio for rectangular rooms
Room cavity ratio for irregular-shaped rooms
Where: L =Length of room; W = Width of room; H =Vertical distance from the work plane to the centerline of the lighting fixture; P
= Perimeter of room, and A = Area of room
TABLE 140.6-G TAILORED METHOD GENERAL LIGHTING POWER ALLOWED – BY ILLUMANCE AND
General Lighting Power Density (W/ft²) for the following RCR valuesbvaluesb
a Illuminance values from Column 2 of TABLE 140.6-D.
b RCR values are calculated using applicable equations in TABLE 140.6-F.
SECTION 140.6 – PRESCRIPTIVE REQUIREMENTS FOR INDOOR LIGHTING
2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards Page 237
SECTION 140.7 – PRESCRIPTIVE REQUIREMENTS FOR OUTDOOR
(a) An outdoor lighting installation complies with this section if it meets the requirements in Subsections (b) and
(c), and the actual outdoor lighting power installed is no greater than the allowed outdoor lighting power
calculated under Subsection (d). The allowed outdoor lighting shall be calculated according to Outdoor Lighting
EXCEPTIONS to Section 140.7(a): When more than 50 percent of the light from a luminaire falls within one
or more of the following applications, the lighting power for that luminaire shall be exempt from Section 140.7:
2. Lighting required and regulated by the Federal Aviation Administration, and the Coast Guard.
3. Lighting for public streets, roadways, highways and traffic signage lighting, including lighting for driveway
entrances occurring in the public right-of-way.
4. Lighting for sports and athletic fields, and children’s playgrounds.
5. Lighting for industrial sites, including but not limited to, rail yards, maritime shipyards and docks, piers and
marinas, chemical and petroleum processing plants, and aviation facilities.
7. Lighting of signs complying with the requirements of Sections 130.3 and 140.8.
8. Lighting of tunnels, bridges, stairs, wheelchair elevator lifts for American with Disabilities Act (ADA)
compliance, and ramps that are other than parking garage ramps.
10. In theme parks: outdoor lighting only for themes and special effects.
11. Lighting for outdoor theatrical and other outdoor live performances, provided that these lighting systems are
additions to area lighting systems and are controlled by a multiscene or theatrical cross-fade control station
12. Outdoor lighting systems for qualified historic buildings, as defined in the California Historic Building
Code (Title 24, Part 8), if they consist solely of historic lighting components or replicas of historic lighting
components. If lighting systems for qualified historic buildings contain some historic lighting components
or replicas of historic components, combined with other lighting components, only those historic or historic
replica components are exempt. All other outdoor lighting systems for qualified historic buildings shall
(b) Outdoor Lighting Power Trade-offs. Outdoor lighting power trade-offs shall be determined as follows:
1. Allowed lighting power determined according to Section 140.7(d)1 for general hardscape lighting
allowance may be traded to specific applications in Section 140.7(d)2, provided the hardscape area from
which the lighting power is traded continues to be illuminated in accordance with Section 140.7(d)1A.
2. Allowed lighting power determined according to Section 140.7(d)2 for additional lighting power allowances
for specific applications shall not be traded between specific applications, or to hardscape lighting in
3. Trading of lighting power allowances between outdoor and indoor areas shall not be permitted.
(c) Calculation of Actual Lighting Power. The wattage of outdoor luminaires shall be determined in accordance
(d) Calculation of Allowed Lighting Power. The allowed lighting power shall be the combined total of the sum of
the general hardscape lighting allowance determined in accordance with Section 140.7(d)1, and the sum of the
additional lighting power allowance for specific applications determined in accordance with Section 140.7(d)2.
1. General Hardscape Lighting Allowance. Determine the general hardscape lighting power allowances as
SECTION 140.7 – PRESCRIPTIVE REQUIREMENTS FOR OUTDOOR LIGHTING
Page 238 2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards
A. The general hardscape area of a site shall include parking lot(s), roadway(s), driveway(s), sidewalk(s),
walkway(s), bikeway(s), plaza(s), bridge(s), tunnel(s), and other improved area(s) that are illuminated.
In plan view of the site, determine the illuminated hardscape area, which is defined as any hardscape
area that is within a square pattern around each luminaire or pole that is ten times the luminaire
mounting height with the luminaire in the middle of the pattern, less any areas that are within a
building, beyond the hardscape area, beyond property lines or obstructed by a structure. The
illuminated hardscape area shall include portions of planters and landscaped areas that are within the
lighting application and are less than or equal to 10 feet wide in the short dimensions and are enclosed
by hardscape or other improvement on at least three sides. Multiply the illuminated hardscape area by
the Area Wattage Allowance (AWA) from Table 140.7-A for the appropriate Lighting Zone.
B. Determine the perimeter length of the general hardscape area. The total perimeter shall not include
portions of hardscape that are not illuminated according to Section 140.7(d)1A. Multiply the hardscape
perimeter by the Linear Wattage Allowance (LWA) for hardscape from Table 140.7-A for the
appropriate lighting zone. The perimeter length for hardscape around landscaped areas and permanent
i. Landscaped areas completely enclosed within the hardscape area, and which have a width or length
less than 10 feet wide, shall not be added to the hardscape perimeter length.
ii. Landscaped areas completely enclosed within the hardscape area, and which width or length is a
minimum of 10 feet wide, the perimeter of the landscaped areas or permanent planter shall be
added to the hardscape perimeter length.
iii. Landscaped edges that are not abutting the hardscape shall not be added to the hardscape perimeter
C. Determine the Initial Wattage Allowance (IWA) for general hardscape lighting from Table 140.7-A for
the appropriate lighting zone. The hardscape area shall be permitted one IWA per site.
D. The general hardscape lighting allowance shall be the sum of the allowed watts determined from (A),
2. Additional Lighting Power Allowance for Specific Applications. Additional lighting power for specific
applications shall be the smaller of the additional lighting allowances for specific applications determined in
accordance with TABLE 140.7-B for the appropriate lighting zone, or the actual installed lighting power
meeting the requirements for the allowance.
SECTION 140.7 – PRESCRIPTIVE REQUIREMENTS FOR OUTDOOR LIGHTING
2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards Page 239
TABLE 140.7-A GENERAL HARDSCAPE LIGHTING POWER ALLOWANCE
Type of Power Lighting Zone 03 Lighting Zone 13 Lighting Zone 23 Lighting Zone 33 Lighting Zone 43
1Continuous lighting is explicitly prohibited in Lighting Zone 0. A single luminaire of 15 Watts or less may be installed at an entrance to a
parking area, trail head, fee payment kiosk, outhouse, or toilet facility, as required to provide safe navigation of the site infrastructure.
Luminaires installed shall meet the maximum zonal lumen limits as specified in Section 130.2(b).
2Where greater than 50% of the paved surface of a parking lot is finished with concrete. This does not extend beyond the parking lot, and does
not include any other General Hardscape areas.
3Narrow band spectrum light sources with a dominant peak wavelength greater than 580 nm – as mandated by local, state, or federal agencies
to minimize the impact on local, active professional astronomy or nocturnal habitat of specific local fauna – shall be allowed a 2.0 lighting
SECTION 140.7 – PRESCRIPTIVE REQUIREMENTS FOR OUTDOOR LIGHTING
Page 240 2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards
TABLE 140.7-B ADDITIONAL LIGHTING POWER ALLOWANCE FOR SPECIFIC APPLICATIONS
All area and distance measurements in plan view unless otherwise noted.
Lighting Lighting Lighting Lighting Lighting
WATTAGE ALLOWANCE PER APPLICATION. Use all that apply as appropriate.
Building Entrances or Exits. Allowance per door. Luminaires Not 9 15 19 21
qualifying for this allowance shall be within 20 feet of the door. applicable watts watts watts watts
Primary Entrances to Senior Care Facilities, Police Stations,
Healthcare Facilities, Fire Stations, and Emergency Vehicle
Facilities. Allowance per primary entrance(s) only. Primary entrances
shall provide access for the general public and shall not be used Not 20 40 57 60
exclusively for staff or service personnel. This allowance shall be in applicable watts watts watts watts
addition to the building entrance or exit allowance above. Luminaires
qualifying for this allowance shall be within 100 feet of the primary
Drive Up Windows. Allowance per customer service location.
Luminaires qualifying for this allowance shall be within 2 mounting
applicable watts watts watts watts
heights of the sill of the window.
Vehicle Service Station Uncovered Fuel Dispenser. Allowance per
fueling dispenser. Luminaires qualifying for this allowance shall be
applicable watts watts watts watts
within 2 mounting heights of the dispenser.
ATM Machine Lighting. Allowance per ATM machine. Luminaires Not 100 watts for first ATM machine, 35 watts for each
qualifying for this allowance shall be within 50 feet of the dispenser. applicable additional ATM machine.
WATTAGE ALLOWANCE PER UNIT LENGTH (w/linear ft). May be used for one or two frontage side(s) per site.
Outdoor Sales Frontage. Allowance for frontage immediately
adjacent to the principal viewing location(s) and unobstructed for its
viewing length. A corner sales lot may include two adjacent sides
provided that a different principal viewing location exists for each
side. Luminaires qualifying for this allowance shall be located
between the principal viewing location and the frontage outdoor sales
WATTAGE ALLOWANCE PER HARDSCAPE AREA (W/ft²). May be used for any illuminated hardscape area on the
Hardscape Ornamental Lighting. Allowance for the total site
illuminated hardscape area. Luminaires qualifying for this allowance
shall be rated for 100 watts or less as determined in accordance with
Section 130.0(d), and shall be post-top luminaires, lanterns, pendant
WATTAGE ALLOWANCE PER SPECIFIC AREA (W/ft²). Use as appropriate provided that none of the following
I specific applications shall be used for the same area.
Building Facades. Only areas of building façade that are illuminated
shall qualify for this allowance. Luminaires qualifying for this
allowance shall be aimed at the façade and shall be capable of
illuminating it without obstruction or interference by permanent
Outdoor Sales Lots. Allowance for uncovered sales lots used
exclusively for the display of vehicles or other merchandise for sale.
Driveways, parking lots or other non sales areas shall be considered Not 0.060 0.210 0.280 0.485
hardscape areas even if these areas are completely surrounded by sales applicable W/ft² W/ft² W/ft² W/ft²
lot on all sides. Luminaires qualifying for this allowance shall be
within 5 mounting heights of the sales lot area.
Vehicle Service Station Hardscape. Allowance for the total
illuminated hardscape area less area of buildings, under canopies, off
property, or obstructed by signs or structures. Luminaires qualifying Not 0.006 0.068 0.138 0.200
for this allowance shall be illuminating the hardscape area and shall applicable W/ft² W/ft² W/ft² W/ft²
not be within a building, below a canopy, beyond property lines, or
Vehicle Service Station Canopies. Allowance for the total area
within the drip line of the canopy. Luminaires qualifying for this
allowance shall be located under the canopy.
SECTION 140.7 – PRESCRIPTIVE REQUIREMENTS FOR OUTDOOR LIGHTING
2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards Page 241
Sales Canopies. Allowance for the total area within the drip line of the
canopy. Luminaires qualifying for this allowance shall be located
Non-sales Canopies and Tunnels. Allowance for the total area within
the drip line of the canopy or inside the tunnel. Luminaires qualifying
for this allowance shall be located under the canopy or tunnel.
Guard Stations. Allowance up to 1,000 square feet per vehicle lane.
Guard stations provide access to secure areas controlled by security
personnel who stop and may inspect vehicles and vehicle occupants, Not 0.081 0.176 0.325 0.425
including identification, documentation, vehicle license plates, and applicable W/ft² W/ft² W/ft² W/ft²
vehicle contents. Qualifying luminaires shall be within 2 mounting
heights of a vehicle lane or the guardhouse.
Student Pick-up/Drop-off zone. Allowance for the area of the student
pick-up/drop-off zone, with or without canopy, for preschool through
12th grade school campuses. A student pick-up/drop off zone is a
curbside, controlled traffic area on a school campus where students are Not No 0.056 0.200 No
picked-up and dropped off from vehicles. The allowed area shall be applicable Allowance W/ft² W/ft² Allowance
the smaller of the actual width or 25 feet, times the smaller of the
actual length or 250 feet. Qualifying luminaires shall be within 2
mounting heights of the student pick-up/drop-off zone.
Outdoor Dining. Allowance for the total illuminated hardscape of
outdoor dining. Outdoor dining areas are hardscape areas used to serve Not 0.004 0.030 0.050 0.075
and consume food and beverages. Qualifying luminaires shall be applicable W/ft² W/ft² W/ft² W/ft²
within 2 mounting heights of the hardscape area of outdoor dining.
Special Security Lighting for Retail Parking and Pedestrian
Hardscape. This additional allowance is for illuminated retail parking
and pedestrian hardscape identified as having special security needs.
This allowance shall be in addition to the building entrance or exit
SECTION 140.7 – PRESCRIPTIVE REQUIREMENTS FOR OUTDOOR LIGHTING
Page 242 2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards
SECTION 140.8 – PRESCRIPTIVE REQUIREMENTS FOR SIGNS
This section applies to all internally illuminated and externally illuminated signs, unfiltered light emitting diodes
(LEDs), and unfiltered neon, both indoor and outdoor. Each sign shall comply with either Subsection (a) or (b), as
1. For internally illuminated signs, the maximum allowed lighting power shall not exceed the product of the
illuminated sign area and 12 watts per square foot. For double-faced signs, only the area of a single face
shall be used to determine the allowed lighting power.
2. For externally illuminated signs, the maximum allowed lighting power shall not exceed the product of the
illuminated sign area and 2.3 watts per square foot. Only areas of an externally lighted sign that are
illuminated without obstruction or interference, by one or more luminaires, shall be used.
3. Lighting for unfiltered light emitting diodes (LEDs) and unfiltered neon shall comply with Section 140.8(b).
(b) Alternate Lighting Sources. The sign shall comply if it is equipped only with one or more of the following
2. Metal halide lamps that are:
A. Pulse start or ceramic served by a ballast that has a minimum efficiency of 88 percent or greater; or
B. Pulse start that are 320 watts or smaller, are not 250 watt or 175 watt lamps, and are served by a ballast
that has a minimum efficiency of 80 percent.
Ballast efficiency is the reference lamp power divided by the ballast input power when tested according
3. Neon or cold cathode lamps with transformer or power supply efficiency greater than or equal to the
A. A minimum efficiency of 75 percent when the transformer or power supply rated output current is less
B. A minimum efficiency of 68 percent when the transformer or power supply rated output current is 50
The ratio of the output wattage to the input wattage is at 100 percent tubing load.
4. Fluorescent lighting systems meeting one of the following requirements:
A. Use only lamps with a minimum color rendering index (CRI) of 80; or
B. Use only electronic ballasts with a fundamental output frequency not less than 20 kHz.
5. Light emitting diodes (LEDs) with a power supply having an efficiency of 80 percent or greater; or
EXCEPTION to Section 140.8(b)5: Single voltage external power supplies that are designed to convert
120 volt AC input into lower voltage DC or AC output, and have a nameplate output power less than or
equal to 250 watts, shall comply with the applicable requirements of the Appliance Efficiency Regulations
6. Compact fluorescent lamps that do not contain a medium screw base socket (E24/E26).
EXCEPTION 1 to Section 140.8: Unfiltered incandescent lamps that are not part of an electronic message
center (EMC), an internally illuminated sign or an externally illuminated sign.
EXCEPTION 2 to Section 140.8: Exit signs. Exit signs shall meet the requirements of the Appliance
EXCEPTION 3 to Section 140.8: Traffic Signs. Traffic signs shall meet the requirements of the Appliance
SECTION 140.8 – PRESCRIPTIVE REQUIREMENTS FOR SIGNS
2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards Page 243
SECTION 140.8 – PRESCRIPTIVE REQUIREMENTS FOR SIGNS
Page 244 2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards
SECTION 140.9 – PRESCRIPTIVE REQUIREMENTS FOR COVERED
(a) Prescriptive Requirements for Computer Rooms. Space conditioning systems serving a computer room with
a power density greater than 20 W/ft2 shall comply with this section by being designed with and having
constructed and installed a cooling system that meets the requirements of Subsections 1 through 6.
1. Economizers. Each individual cooling system primarily serving computer rooms shall include either:
A. An integrated air economizer capable of providing 100 percent of the expected system cooling load as
calculated in accordance with a method approved by the Commission, at outside air temperatures of
55°F dry-bulb/50°F wet-bulb and below, and be equipped with a fault detection and diagnostic system
B. An integrated water economizer capable of providing 100 percent of the expected system cooling load
as calculated in accordance with a method approved by the Commission, at outside air temperatures of
EXCEPTION 1 to Section 140.9(a)1: Individual computer rooms under 5 tons in a building that does not
EXCEPTION 2 to Section 140.9(a)1: New cooling systems serving an existing computer room in an
existing building up to a total of 50 tons of new cooling equipment per building.
EXCEPTION 3 to Section 140.9(a)1: New cooling systems serving a new computer room in an existing
building up to a total of 20 tons of new cooling equipment per building.
EXCEPTION 4 to Section 140.9(a)1: A computer room may be served by a fan system without an
economizer if it is also served by a fan system with an economizer that also serves other spaces within the
building, provided that all of the following are met:
i. The economizer system is sized to meet the design cooling load of the computer room when the
other spaces within the building are at 50 percent of their design load; and
ii. The economizer system has the ability to serve only the computer room, e.g., shut off flow to other
spaces within the building when unoccupied; and
iii. The noneconomizer system does not operate when the outside air drybulb temperatures is below
60°F and, the cooling load of other spaces within the building served by the economizer system is
less than 50 percent of design load.
2. Reheat. Each computer room zone shall have controls that prevent reheating, recooling and simultaneous
provisions of heating and cooling to the same zone, such as mixing or simultaneous supply of air that has
been previously mechanically heated and air that has been previously cooled, either by cooling equipment
3. Humidification. Nonadiabatic humidification (e.g. steam, infrared) is prohibited. Only adiabatic
4. Power Consumption of Fans. The total fan power at design conditions of each fan system shall not exceed
5. Fan Control. Each unitary air conditioner with mechanical cooling capacity exceeding 60,000 Btu/hr and
each chilled water fan system shall be designed to vary the airflow rate as a function of actual load and shall
have controls and/or devices (such as two-speed or variable speed control) that will result in fan motor
demand of no more than 50 percent of design wattage at 66 percent of design fan speed.
6. Containment. Computer rooms with air-cooled computers in racks and with a design load exceeding 175
kW/room shall include air barriers such that there is no significant air path for computer discharge air to
recirculate back to computer inlets without passing through a cooling system.
EXCEPTION 1 to Section 140.9(a)6: Expansions of existing computer rooms.
EXCEPTION 2 to Section 140.9(a)6: Computer racks with a design load less than 1 kW/rack.
SECTION 140.9 – PRESCRIPTIVE REQUIREMENTS FOR COVERED PROCESSES
2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards Page 245
EXCEPTION 3 to Section 140.9(a)6: Equivalent energy performance based on computational fluid
EXCEPTION to Section 140.9(a): Computer rooms located in healthcare facilities.
(b) Prescriptive Requirements for Commercial Kitchens.
A. Replacement air introduced directly into the hood cavity of kitchen exhaust hoods shall not exceed 10
percent of the hood exhaust airflow rate.
B. For kitchen/dining facilities having total Type I and Type II kitchen hood exhaust airflow rates greater
than 5,000 cfm, each Type I hood shall have an exhaust rate that complies with TABLE 140.9-A. If a
single hood or hood section is installed over appliances with different duty ratings, then the maximum
allowable flow rate for the hood or hood section shall not exceed the TABLE 140.9-A values for the
highest appliance duty rating under the hood or hood section. Refer to ASHRAE Standard 154-2011 for
definitions of hood type, appliance duty and next exhaust flow rate.
EXCEPTION 1 to Section 140.9(b)1B: 75 percent of the total Type I and Type II exhaust
replacement air is transfer air that would otherwise be exhausted.
EXCEPTION 2 to Section 140.9(b)1B: Existing hoods not being replaced as part of an addition or
TABLE 140.9-A MAXIMUM NET EXHAUST FLOW RATE, CFM PER LINEAR FOOT OF HOOD LENGTH
Type of Hood Light Duty Medium Duty Heavy Duty Extra Heavy
Equipment Equipment Equipment Duty Equipment
Eyebrow 175 175 Not Allowed Not Allowed
Backshelf / Passover 210 210 280 Not Allowed
A. Mechanically cooled or heated makeup air delivered to any space with a kitchen hood shall not exceed
i. The supply flow required to meet the space heating and cooling load; or
ii. The hood exhaust flow minus the available transfer air from adjacent spaces. Available transfer air
is that portion of outdoor ventilation air serving adjacent spaces not required to satisfy other
exhaust needs, such as restrooms, not required to maintain pressurization of adjacent spaces, and
that would otherwise be relieved from the building.
EXCEPTION to Section 140.9(b)2A: Existing kitchen makeup air units not being replaced as part of
B. A kitchen/dining facility having a total Type I and Type II kitchen hood exhaust airflow rate greater
than 5,000 cfm shall have one of the following:
i. At least 50 percent of all replacement air is transfer air that would otherwise be exhausted; or
ii. Demand ventilation system(s) on at least 75 percent of the exhaust air. Such systems shall:
a. Include controls necessary to modulate airflow in response to appliance operation and to
maintain full capture and containment of smoke, effluent and combustion products during
b. Include failsafe controls that result in full flow upon cooking sensor failure; and
c. Include an adjustable timed override to allow occupants the ability to temporarily override the
SECTION 140.9 – PRESCRIPTIVE REQUIREMENTS FOR COVERED PROCESSES
Page 246 2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards
d. Be capable of reducing exhaust and replacement air system airflow rates to the larger of:
(i) 50 percent of the total design exhaust and replacement air system airflow rates; or
(ii) The ventilation rate required as specified by Section 120.1(c)3.
iii. Listed energy recovery devices with a sensible heat recovery effectiveness of not less than 40
percent on at least 50 percent of the total exhaust airflow; or
iv.A minimum of 75 percent of makeup air volume that is:
a. Unheated or heated to no more than 60°F; and
b. Uncooled or cooled without the use of mechanical cooling.
EXCEPTION to Section 140.9(b)2B: Existing hoods not being replaced as part of an addition or
3. Kitchen Exhaust System Acceptance. Before an occupancy permit is granted for a commercial kitchen
subject to Section 140.9(b), the following equipment and systems shall be certified as meeting the
Acceptance Requirements for Code Compliance, as specified by the Reference Nonresidential Appendix
NA7. A Certificate of Acceptance shall be submitted to the enforcement agency that certifies that the
equipment and systems meet the acceptance requirements specified in NA7.11.
(c) Prescriptive Requirements for Laboratory and Factory Exhaust Systems.
1. Airflow Reduction Requirements. For buildings with laboratory exhaust systems where the minimum
circulation rate to comply with code or accreditation standards is 10 ACH or less, the design exhaust airflow
shall be capable of reducing zone exhaust and makeup airflow rates to the regulated minimum circulation
rate, or the minimum required to maintain pressurization requirements, whichever is larger. Variable
exhaust and makeup airflow shall be coordinated to achieve the required space pressurization at varied
levels of demand and fan system capacity.
EXCEPTION 1 to Section 140.9(c)1: Laboratory exhaust systems serving zones where constant volume is
required by the Authority Having Jurisdiction, facility Environmental Health & Safety department or other
EXCEPTION 2 to Section 140.9(c)1: New zones on an existing constant volume exhaust system.
2. Exhaust System Transfer Air. Conditioned supply air delivered to any space with mechanical exhaust
shall comply with the requirements of Section 140.4(o).
3. Fan System Power Consumption. All newly installed fan exhaust systems serving a laboratory or factory
greater than 10,000 CFM, shall meet subsection A and either B, C, or D:
A. System shall meet all discharge requirements in ANSI Z9.5-2012.
B. The exhaust fan system power shall not exceed 0.85 watts per cfm of exhaust air for systems with air
filtration, scrubbers, or other air treatment devices. For all other exhaust fan systems the system power
shall not exceed 0.65 watts per cfm of exhaust air. Exhaust fan system power equals the sum of the
power of all fans in the exhaust system that are required to operate at normal occupied design
conditions in order to exhaust air from the conditioned space to the outdoors. Exhaust air does not
include entrained air, but does include all exhaust air from fume hoods, hazardous exhaust flows, or
EXCEPTION to Section 140.9(c)3B: Laboratory exhaust systems where applicable local, state, or
federal exhaust treatment requirements specify installation of air treatment devices that cause more than
C. The volume flow rate at the stack shall vary based on the measured 5-minute averaged wind speed and
wind direction obtained from a calibrated local anemometer.
i. At least two anemometers shall be installed in a location that experiences similar wind conditions
to the free stream environment above the exhaust stacks and be at a height that is outside the wake
SECTION 140.9 – PRESCRIPTIVE REQUIREMENTS FOR COVERED PROCESSES
2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards Page 247
ii. Look-up tables shall be used to define the required exhaust volume flow rate, as a function of at
least eight wind speeds and eight wind directions, to maintain downwind concentrations below
health and odor limits, as defined by the 2018 American Conference of Governmental Industrial
Hygienists Threshold Limit Values and Biological Exposure Indices, for all detectable
contaminants, or as defined by applicable local, state, or federal jurisdictions, if more stringent.
iii. Wind speed/direction sensors shall be certified by the manufacturer to be accurate within plus or
minus 40 fpm (0.2 m/s) and 5.0° when measured at sea level and 25°C, factory calibrated, and
certified by the manufacturer to require calibration no more frequently than once every 5 years.
iv. Upon detection of anemometer and/or signal failure, the system shall reset the exhaust volume
flow rate to the value needed to maintain downwind concentrations below health and odor limits
for all detectable contaminants at worst-case wind conditions and shall report the fault to an
Energy Management Control System or fault management application which automatically
provides notification of the fault to a remote system provider. The system shall have logic that
automatically checks for anemometer failure by the following means.
a. If any anemometer has not been calibrated within the manufacturer’s recommended calibration
b. During unoccupied periods the system compares the readings of all anemometers. If any
anemometer is more than 30% above or below the average reading for a period of 4 hours, the
v. Before an occupancy permit is granted for a laboratory or process facility subject to Section
140.9(c)3C, the applicable equipment and systems shall be certified as meeting the Acceptance
Requirements for Code Compliance, as specified by the Reference Nonresidential Appendix
NA7.16. A Certificate of Acceptance shall be submitted to the enforcement agency that certifies
that the equipment and systems meet the acceptance requirements specified in NA7.16.
D. The volume flow rate at the stack shall vary based on the measured contaminant concentration in the
exhaust plenum from a calibrated contaminant sensor installed within each exhaust plenum.
i. A contaminant-event threshold shall be established based on maintaining downwind concentrations
below health and odor limits for all detectable chemicals at worst-case wind conditions, as defined
by the 2018 American Conference of Governmental Industrial Hygienists Threshold Limit Values
and Biological Exposure Indices, or as defined by applicable local, state, or federal jurisdictions, if
ii. At least two contaminant concentration sensors shall be Photo Ionization Detectors (PID) certified
by the manufacturer to be accurate within plus or minus 5% when measured at sea level and 25°C,
factory calibrated, and certified by the manufacturer to require calibration no more frequently than
iii. Upon detection of sensor and/or signal failure, the system shall reset the exhaust volume flow rate
to the value needed to maintain downwind concentrations below health and odor limits for all
detectable contaminants at worst-case wind conditions and shall report the fault to an Energy
Management Control System or fault management application which automatically provides
notification of the fault to a remote system provider. The system shall have logic that automatically
checks for sensor failure by the following means.
a. If any sensor has not been calibrated within the manufacturer’s recommended calibration
b. During unoccupied periods the system compares the readings of all sensors. If any sensor is
more than 30% above or below the average reading for a period of 4 hours, the sensor has
iv. Before an occupancy permit is granted for a laboratory or process facility subject to Section
140.9(c)3D, the applicable equipment and systems shall be certified as meeting the Acceptance
Requirements for Code Compliance, as specified by the Reference Nonresidential Appendix
NA7.16. A Certificate of Acceptance shall be submitted to the enforcement agency that certifies
that the equipment and systems meet the acceptance requirements specified in NA7.16.
SECTION 140.9 – PRESCRIPTIVE REQUIREMENTS FOR COVERED PROCESSES
Page 248 2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards
4. Fume Hood Automatic Sash Closure. Variable air volume laboratory fume hoods with vertical only
sashes located in fume hood intensive laboratories, as described in Table 140.9-B, shall have an automatic
sash closure system that complies with the following:
A. The automatic sash closure system shall be capable of the following:
i. The automatic sash closure system shall have a dedicated zone presence sensor that detects people
in the area near the fume hood sash and automatically closes the sash within 5 minutes of no
ii. The automatic sash closure system shall have controls to prevent the sash from automatic closing
when a force of no more than 10 lbs is detected.
iii. The automatic sash closure system shall be equipped with an obstruction sensor that prevents the
sash from automatic closing with obstructions in the sash opening. Obstruction sensor shall be
capable of sensing transparent materials such as laboratory glassware.
iv. The automatic sash closure system shall be capable of being configured in a manual open mode
where once the sash is closed, detection of people in the area near the fume hood by the zone
presence sensor does not open the fume hood sash.
B. Fume Hood Automatic Sash Closure Acceptance. Before an occupancy permit is granted for the fume
hoods subject to 140.9(c)4, the equipment and systems shall be certified as meeting the Acceptance
Requirement for Code Compliance as specified by the Reference Nonresidential Appendix NA7. A
Certificate of Acceptance shall be submitted to the enforcement agency that certifies that the equipment
and systems meet the acceptance requirements specified in NA7.17.
Table 140.9-B Fume Hood Intensive Laboratories
SECTION 140.9 – PRESCRIPTIVE REQUIREMENTS FOR COVERED PROCESSES
2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards Page 249
AND TO INTERNALLY AND EXTERNALLY ILLUMINATED SIGNS
Additions, alterations, and repairs to existing nonresidential, high-rise residential, and hotel/motel buildings, existing
outdoor lighting for these occupancies, and internally and externally illuminated signs, shall meet the requirements
specified in Sections 100.0 through 110.10, and 120.0 through 130.5 that are applicable to the building project, and
either the performance compliance approach (energy budgets) in Section 141.0(a)2 (for additions) or 141.0(b)3 (for
alterations), or the prescriptive compliance approach in Section 141.0(a)1 (for additions) or 141.0(b)2 (for
alterations), for the Climate Zone in which the building is located. Climate zones are shown in FIGURE 100.1-A.
Covered process requirements for additions, alterations and repairs to existing nonresidential, high-rise residential,
and hotel/motel buildings are specified in Section 141.1.
EXCEPTION to Section 141.0: Alterations to healthcare facilities are not required to comply with this Section.
NOTE: For alterations that change the occupancy classification of the building, the requirements specified in
Section 141.0(b) apply to the occupancy after the alterations.
(a) Additions. Additions shall meet either Item 1 or 2 below.
1. Prescriptive approach. The envelope and lighting of the addition; any newly installed space-conditioning
system, electrical power distribution system, or water-heating system; any addition to an outdoor lighting
system; and any new sign installed in conjunction with an indoor or outdoor addition shall meet the
A. The envelope and indoor lighting in the conditioned space of the addition, and any newly installed
space-conditioning system, electrical power distribution system, or water-heating system, shall meet the
applicable requirements of Sections 110.0 through 120.7, 120.9 through 130.5; and
i. The addition alone shall comply with Section 140.1; or
ii. Existing plus addition plus alteration. The standard design for existing plus addition, plus alteration
energy use is the combination of the existing building’s unaltered components to remain, existing
building altered components that are the more efficient, in TDV energy, of either the existing
conditions, or the requirements of Section 141.0(b)2, plus the proposed addition's energy use
meeting the requirements of Section 140.1. The proposed design energy use is the combination of
the existing building’s unaltered components to remain and the altered component’s energy
features, plus the proposed energy features of the addition.
EXCEPTION 1 to Section 141.0(a): When heating, cooling, or service water heating to an addition are
provided by expanding existing systems, the existing systems and equipment need not comply with Sections
EXCEPTION 2 to Section 141.0(a): Where an existing system with electric reheat is expanded by adding
variable air volume (VAV) boxes to serve an addition, total electric reheat capacity may be expanded so that the
SECTION 141.0 – ADDITIONS, ALTERATIONS, AND REPAIRS TO EXISTING NONRESIDENTIAL, HIGH-RISE
RESIDENTIAL, AND HOTEL/MOTEL BUILDINGS, TO EXISTING OUTDOOR LIGHTING, AND TO
INTERNALLY AND EXTERNALLY ILLUMINATED SIGNS
Page 250 2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards
total capacity does not exceed 150 percent of the existing installed electric heating capacity in any one permit,
and the system need not comply with Section 140.4(g). Additional electric reheat capacity in excess of 150
percent of the existing installed electric heating capacity may be added subject to the requirements of Section
EXCEPTION 3 to Section 141.0(a): Duct Sealing. When ducts are extended from an existing duct system to
serve the addition, the existing duct system and the extended ducts shall meet the applicable requirements
EXCEPTION 4 to Section 141.0(a): Additions that increase the area of the roof by 2,000 square feet or less are
exempt from the requirements of Section 110.10.
(b) Alterations. Alterations to components of existing nonresidential, high-rise residential, hotel/motel, or
relocatable public school buildings, including alterations made in conjunction with a change in building
occupancy to a nonresidential, high-rise residential, or hotel/motel occupancy shall meet item 1, and either Item
1. Mandatory Requirements. Altered components in a nonresidential, high-rise residential, or hotel/motel
building shall meet the minimum requirements in this Section.
A. Roof/Ceiling Insulation. The opaque portions of the roof/ceiling that separate conditioned spaces from
unconditioned spaces or ambient air shall meet the requirements of Section 141.0(b)2Biii.
B. Wall Insulation. For the altered opaque portion of walls separating conditioned spaces from
unconditioned spaces or ambient air shall meet the applicable requirements of Items 1 through 4 below:
1. Metal Building. A minimum of R-13 insulation between framing members, or the weighted
average U-factor of the wall assembly shall not exceed U-0.113.
2. Metal Framed. A minimum of R-13 insulation between framing members, or the weighted
average U-factor of the wall assembly shall not exceed U-0.217.
3. Wood Framed and Others. A minimum of R-11 insulation between framing members, or the
weighted average U-factor of the wall assembly shall not exceed U-0.110.
4. Spandrel Panels and Glass Curtain Walls. A minimum of R-4, or the weighted average U-factor
of the wall assembly shall not exceed U-0.280.
EXCEPTION to Section 141.0(b)1B: Light and heavy mass walls.
C. Floor Insulation. For the altered portion of raised floors that separate conditioned spaces from
unconditioned spaces or ambient air shall meet the applicable requirements of Items 1 through 3 below:
1. Raised Framed Floors. A minimum of R-11 insulation between framing members, or the
weighted average U-factor of the floor assembly shall not exceed the U-factor of U-0.071.
2. Raised Mass Floors in High-rise Residential and Hotel/Motel Guest Rooms. A minimum of R-
6 insulation, or the weighted average U-factor of the floor assembly shall not exceed the U-factor
3. Raised Mass Floors in Other Occupancies. No minimum U-factor requirement.
2. Prescriptive approach. The altered components of the envelope, or space conditioning, lighting, electrical
power distribution and water heating systems, and any newly installed equipment serving the alteration,
shall meet the applicable requirements of Sections 110.0 through 110.9, Sections 120.0 through 120.6, and
EXCEPTION to Section 141.0(b)2: The requirements of Section 120.1(i) shall not apply to alterations of
A. Fenestration alterations other than repair and those subject to Section 141.0(b)2 shall meet the
i. Vertical fenestration alterations shall meet the requirements in Table 141.0-A.
SECTION 141.0 – ADDITIONS, ALTERATIONS, AND REPAIRS TO EXISTING NONRESIDENTIAL, HIGH-RISE
RESIDENTIAL, AND HOTEL/MOTEL BUILDINGS, TO EXISTING OUTDOOR LIGHTING, AND TO
INTERNALLY AND EXTERNALLY ILLUMINATED SIGNS
2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards Page 251
ii. Added vertical fenestration shall meet the requirements of TABLE 140.3-B, C, or D.
iii. All altered or newly installed skylights shall meet the requirements of TABLE 140.3-B, C or D.
EXCEPTION 1 to Section 141.0(b)2Ai: In an alteration, where 150 square feet or less of the
entire building's vertical fenestration is replaced, RSHGC and VT requirements of TABLE 141.0-
EXCEPTION 2 to Section 141.0(b)2Aii: In an alteration, where 50 square feet or less of vertical
fenestration is added, RSHGC and VT requirements of TABLE 140.3-B, C or D shall not apply.
EXCEPTION 3 to Section 141.0(b)2Aiii: In an alteration, where 50 square feet or less of skylight
is added, SHGC and VT requirements of TABLE 140.3-B, C or D shall not apply.
NOTE: Glass replaced in an existing sash and frame or sashes replaced in an existing frame are
considered repairs. In these cases, Section 141.0(c) requires that the replacement be at least equivalent
Table 141.0-A Altered Vertical Fenestration Maximum U-Factor and Maximum RSHGC
VT See TABLE 140.3-B, C, and D for all Climate Zones
B. Existing roofs being replaced, recovered or recoated, of nonresidential, high-rise residential and
hotels/motels shall meet the requirements of Section 110.8(i). Roofs with more than 50 percent of the
roof area or more than 2,000 square feet of roof, whichever is less, is being altered the requirements of i
a. Low-sloped roofs in Climate Zones 1 through 16 shall have a minimum aged solar reflectance
of 0.63 and a minimum thermal emittance of 0.75, or a minimum SRI of 75.
EXCEPTION to Section 141.0(b)2Bia: An aged solar reflectance less than 0.63 is allowed
provided the maximum roof/ceiling U-factor in TABLE 141.0-B is not exceeded.
b. Steep-sloped roofs in Climate Zones 1 through 16 shall have a minimum aged solar
reflectance of 0.20 and a minimum thermal emittance of 0.75, or a minimum SRI of 16.
ii. Roofing Products. High-rise residential buildings and hotels and motels:
a. Low-sloped roofs in Climate Zones 10, 11, 13, 14 and 15 shall have a minimum aged solar
reflectance of 0.55 and a minimum thermal emittance of 0.75, or a minimum SRI of 64.
b. Steep-sloped roofs Climate Zones 2 through 15 shall have a minimum aged solar reflectance
of 0.20 and a minimum thermal emittance of 0.75, or a minimum SRI of 16.
EXCEPTION 1 to Sections 141.0(b)2Bi and ii: Roof area covered by building integrated
photovoltaic panels and building integrated solar thermal panels are not required to meet the
minimum requirements for solar reflectance, thermal emittance, or SRI.
EXCEPTION 2 to Sections 141.0(b)2Bi and ii: Roof constructions with a weight of at least 25
lb/ft² are not required to meet the minimum requirements for solar reflectance, thermal emittance,
SECTION 141.0 – ADDITIONS, ALTERATIONS, AND REPAIRS TO EXISTING NONRESIDENTIAL, HIGH-RISE
RESIDENTIAL, AND HOTEL/MOTEL BUILDINGS, TO EXISTING OUTDOOR LIGHTING, AND TO
INTERNALLY AND EXTERNALLY ILLUMINATED SIGNS
Page 252 2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards
Table 141.0-B Roof/Ceiling Insulation Tradeoff for Aged Solar Reflectance
iii. For nonresidential buildings, high-rise residential buildings and hotels/motels, when low-sloped
roofs are exposed to the roof deck or to the roof recover boards, and meets Section 141.0(b)2Bia or
iia, the exposed area shall be insulated to the levels specified in TABLE 141.0-C.
a. Existing roofs that are insulated with at least R-7 insulation or that has a U-factor lower than
0.089are not required to meet the R-value requirement of TABLE 141.0-C.
b. If mechanical equipment is located on the roof and will not be disconnected and lifted as part
of the roof replacement, insulation added may be limited to the maximum insulation thickness
that will allow a height of 8 inches (203 mm) from the roof membrane surface to the top of the
c. If adding the required insulation will reduce the base flashing height to less than 8 inches (203
mm)at penthouse or parapet walls, the insulation added may be limited to the maximum
insulation thickness that will allow a height of 8 inches (203 mm) from the roof membrane
surface to the top of the base flashing, provided that the conditions in Subsections i through iv
I. The penthouse or parapet walls are finished with an exterior cladding material other than
the roofing covering membrane material; and
II. The penthouse or parapet walls have exterior cladding material that must be removed to
install the new roof covering membrane to maintain a base flashing height of 8 inches
III. For nonresidential buildings, the ratio of the replaced roof area to the linear dimension of
affected penthouse or parapet walls shall be less than 25 square feet per linear foot for
Climate Zones 2, and 10 through 16, and less than 100 square feet per linear foot for
Climate Zones 1, and 3 through 9; and
IV. For high-rise residential buildings, hotels or motels, the ratio of the replaced roof area to
the linear dimension of affected penthouse or parapet walls shall be less than 25 square
feet per linear foot for all Climate Zones.
SECTION 141.0 – ADDITIONS, ALTERATIONS, AND REPAIRS TO EXISTING NONRESIDENTIAL, HIGH-RISE
RESIDENTIAL, AND HOTEL/MOTEL BUILDINGS, TO EXISTING OUTDOOR LIGHTING, AND TO
INTERNALLY AND EXTERNALLY ILLUMINATED SIGNS
2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards Page 253
d. Tapered insulation may be used which has a thermal resistance less than that prescribed in
TABLE 141.0-C at the drains and other low points, provided that the thickness of insulation is
increased at the high points of the roof so that the average thermal resistance equals or exceeds
the value that is specified in TABLE 141.0-C.
TABLE 141.0-C INSULATION REQUIREMENTS FOR ROOF ALTERATIONS
High-Rise Residential and Guest
Climate Zone U-factor U-factor
C. New or Replacement Space-Conditioning Systems or Components other than new or replacement
space-conditioning system ducts shall meet the requirements of Section 140.4 applicable to the systems
or components being altered. For compliance with Section 140.4(c)1, additional fan power adjustment
credits are available as specified in Table 141.0-D.
Table 141.0-D Fan Power Limitation Pressure Drop Adjustment
Particulate Filtration Credit: MERV 9 through 12 0.5 in. of water
Particulate Filtration Credit: MERV 13 through 15 0.9 in. of water
EXCEPTION 1 to Section 141.0(b)2C: Subsection (b)2C does not apply to replacements of
equivalent or lower capacity electric resistance space heaters for high rise residential apartment units.
EXCEPTION 2 to Section 141.0(b)2C: Subsection (b)2C does not apply to replacement of electric
reheat of equivalent or lower capacity electric resistance space heaters, when natural gas is not
EXCEPTION 3 to Section 141.0(b)2C: Section 140.4(n) is not applicable to new or replacement
D. Altered Duct Systems. When new or replacement space-conditioning system ducts are installed to
serve an existing building, the new ducts shall meet the requirements of Section 120.4. If the space
conditioning system meets the criteria of Section 140.4(l)1, the duct system shall be sealed as
confirmed through field verification and diagnostic testing in accordance with the procedures for duct
sealing of an existing duct system as specified in Reference Nonresidential Appendix NA2, to meet one
i. If the new ducts form an entirely new or replacement duct system directly connected to the air
handler, the measured duct leakage shall be equal to, or less than 6 percent of the system air
handler airflow as confirmed by field verification and diagnostic testing utilizing the procedures in
Reference Nonresidential Appendix Section NA2.1.4.2.1.
SECTION 141.0 – ADDITIONS, ALTERATIONS, AND REPAIRS TO EXISTING NONRESIDENTIAL, HIGH-RISE
RESIDENTIAL, AND HOTEL/MOTEL BUILDINGS, TO EXISTING OUTDOOR LIGHTING, AND TO
INTERNALLY AND EXTERNALLY ILLUMINATED SIGNS
Page 254 2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards
Entirely new or replacement duct systems installed as part of an alteration shall be constructed of
at least 75 percent new duct material, and up to 25 percent may consist of reused parts from the
building's existing duct system, including registers, grilles, boots, air handlers, coils, plenums, and
ducts, if the reused parts are accessible and can be sealed to prevent leakage.
ii. If the new ducts are an extension of an existing duct system, the combined new and existing duct
system shall meet one of the following requirements:
a. The measured duct leakage shall be equal to or less than 15 percent of the system air handler
airflow as confirmed by field verification and diagnostic testing utilizing the procedures in
Reference Nonresidential Appendix Section NA2.1.4.2.1; or
b. If it is not possible to comply with the duct leakage criterion in Subsection 141.0(b)2Diia, then
all accessible leaks shall be sealed and verified through a visual inspection and a smoke test
performed by a certified HERS Rater utilizing the methods specified in Reference
EXCEPTION to Section 141.0(b)2Dii: Duct Sealing. Existing duct systems that are extended,
which are constructed, insulated or sealed with asbestos are exempt from the requirements of
E. Altered Space-Conditioning Systems. When a space-conditioning system is altered by the installation
or replacement of space-conditioning system equipment (including replacement of the air handler,
outdoor condensing unit of a split system air conditioner or heat pump, or cooling or heating coil:
i. For all altered units where the existing thermostat does not comply with the requirements for
demand responsive controls specified in Section 110.12, the existing thermostat shall be replaced
with a demand responsive thermostat that complies with Section 110.12. All newly installed space-
conditioning systems requiring a thermostat shall be equipped with a demand responsive
thermostat that complies with Section 110.12; and
ii. The duct system that is connected to the new or replaced space-conditioning system equipment
shall be sealed, if the duct system meets the criteria of Section 140.4(l)1, as confirmed through
field verification and diagnostic testing, in accordance with the applicable procedures for duct
sealing of altered existing duct systems as specified in Reference Nonresidential Appendix NA2,
and conforming to the applicable leakage compliance criteria in Section 141.0(b)2D.
EXCEPTION 1 to Section 141.0(b)2Eii: Duct Sealing. Buildings altered so that the duct system no
longer meets the criteria of Section 140.4(l)1 are exempt from the requirements of Subsection
EXCEPTION 2 to Section 141.0(b)2Eii: Duct Sealing. Duct systems that are documented to have
been previously sealed as confirmed through field verification and diagnostic testing in accordance
with procedures in the Reference Nonresidential Appendix NA2 are exempt from the requirements of
EXCEPTION 3 to Section 141.0(b)2Eii: Duct Sealing. Existing duct systems constructed, insulated
or sealed with asbestos are exempt from the requirements of Subsection 141.0(b)2Eii.
F. Spaces with lighting systems installed for the first time shall meet the requirements of Sections 110.9,
G. When the requirements of Section 130.1(d) are triggered by the addition of skylights to an existing
building and the lighting system is not recircuited, the daylighting control need not meet the multilevel
H. New internally and externally illuminated signs shall meet the requirements of Sections 110.9, 130.3
I. Altered Indoor Lighting Systems. Alterations to indoor lighting systems that include 10% or more of
the luminaires serving an enclosed space shall meet the requirements of i, ii, or iii below:
SECTION 141.0 – ADDITIONS, ALTERATIONS, AND REPAIRS TO EXISTING NONRESIDENTIAL, HIGH-RISE
RESIDENTIAL, AND HOTEL/MOTEL BUILDINGS, TO EXISTING OUTDOOR LIGHTING, AND TO
INTERNALLY AND EXTERNALLY ILLUMINATED SIGNS
2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards Page 255
i. The alteration shall comply with the indoor lighting power requirements specified in Section 140.6
and the lighting control requirements specified in Table 141.0-F;
ii. The alteration shall not exceed 80% of the indoor lighting power requirements specified in Section
140.6, and shall comply with the lighting control requirements specified in Table 141.0-F; or
iii. The alteration shall be a one-for-one luminaire alteration within a building or tenant space of 5,000
square feet or less, the total wattage of the altered luminaires shall be at least 40% lower compared
to their total pre-alteration wattage, and the alteration shall comply with the lighting control
Alterations to indoor lighting systems shall not prevent the operation of existing, unaltered controls,
and shall not alter controls to remove functions specified in Section 130.1.
Alterations to lighting wiring are considered alterations to the lighting system. Alterations to indoor
lighting systems are not required to separate existing general, floor, wall, display, or ornamental
lighting on shared circuits or controls. New or completely replaced lighting circuits shall comply with
the control separation requirements of Section 130.1(a)3 and 130.1(c)1D.
EXCEPTION 1 to Section 141.0(b)2I. Alteration of portable luminaires, luminaires affixed to
moveable partitions, or lighting excluded as specified in Section 140.6(a)3.
EXCEPTION 2 to Section 141.0(b)2I. Any enclosed space with only one luminaire.
EXCEPTION 3 to Section 141.0(b)2I. Any alteration that would directly cause the disturbance of
asbestos, unless the alteration is made in conjunction with asbestos abatement.
EXCEPTION 4 to Section 141.0(b)2I. Acceptance testing requirements of Section 130.4 are not
required for alterations where lighting controls are added to control 20 or fewer luminaires.
EXCEPTION 5 to Section 141.0(b)2I. Any alteration limited to adding lighting controls or replacing
EXCEPTION 6 to Section 141.0(b)2I. One-for-one luminaire alteration of up to 50 luminaires either
per complete floor of the building or per complete tenant space, per annum.
L. Alterations to existing outdoor lighting systems in a lighting application listed in TABLE 140.7-A or
i. In alterations that increase the connected lighting load, the added or altered luminaires shall meet
the applicable requirements of Section 130.2(c) and the requirements of Section 140.7 for general
hardscape lighting or for the specific lighting applications containing the alterations; and
ii. In alterations that do not increase the connected lighting load, where the greater of 5 luminaires or
10 percent of the existing luminaires are replaced in a general hardscape or a specific lighting
application, the alterations shall meet the following requirements:
a. In parking lots and outdoor sales lots where the bottom of the luminaire is mounted 24 feet or
less above the ground, the replacement luminaires shall comply with Section 130.2(c)1 AND
b. For all other lighting applications and where the bottom of the luminaire is mounted greater
than 24 feet above the ground, the replacement luminaires shall comply with Section
130.2(c)1 AND EITHER comply with Section 130.2(c)2 or be controlled by lighting control
systems, including motion sensors, that automatically reduce lighting power by at least 40
percent in response to the area being vacated of occupants; and
iii. In alterations that do not increase the connected lighting load, where the greater of 5 luminaires or
50 percent of the existing luminaires are replaced in general hardscape or a specific application, the
replacement luminaires shall meet the requirements of subsection ii above and the requirements of
SECTION 141.0 – ADDITIONS, ALTERATIONS, AND REPAIRS TO EXISTING NONRESIDENTIAL, HIGH-RISE
RESIDENTIAL, AND HOTEL/MOTEL BUILDINGS, TO EXISTING OUTDOOR LIGHTING, AND TO
INTERNALLY AND EXTERNALLY ILLUMINATED SIGNS
Page 256 2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards
Section 140.7 for general hardscape lighting or specific lighting applications containing the
EXCEPTION to Section 141.0(b)2Liii. Alterations where the replacement luminaires have at
least 40 percent lower power consumption compared to the original luminaires are not required to
comply with the lighting power allowances of Section 140.7.
EXCEPTION to Section 141.0(b)2L. Acceptance testing requirements of Section 130.4 are not
required for alterations where controls are added to 20 or fewer luminaires.
M. Alterations to existing internally and externally illuminated signs that increase the connected lighting
load, replace and rewire more than 50 percent of the ballasts, or relocate the sign to a different location
on the same site or on a different site shall meet the requirements of Section 140.8.
EXCEPTION to Section 141.0(b)2M. Replacement of parts of an existing sign, including replacing
lamps, the sign face or ballasts, that do not require rewiring or that are done at a time other than when
the sign is relocated, is not an alteration subject to the requirements of Section 141.0(b)2M.
N. Service water-heating systems shall meet the requirements of Section 140.5, except for the solar water
O. A building shell for which interior walls or ceilings are installed for the first time shall meet the
P. Electrical Power Distribution Systems. Alterations to electrical power distribution systems shall meet
the applicable requirements of Section 130.5 as follows:
i. Service Electrical Metering. New or replacement electrical service equipment shall meet the
requirements of Section 130.5(a) applicable to the electrical power distribution system altered.
ii. Separation Of Electrical Circuits For Electrical Energy Monitoring. For entirely new or
complete replacement of electrical power distribution systems, the entire system shall meet the
iii. Voltage Drop. Alterations of feeders and branch circuits where the alteration includes addition,
modification, or replacement of both feeders and branch circuits, the altered circuits shall meet the
EXCEPTION to Section 141.0(b)2Piii: Voltage drop permitted by California Electrical Code
iv. Circuit Controls for 120-Volt Receptacles and Controlled Receptacles. For entirely new or
complete replacement of electrical power distribution systems, the entire system shall meet the
A. The altered envelope, space–conditioning system, lighting and water heating components, and any
newly installed equipment serving the alteration, shall meet the applicable requirements of Sections
EXCEPTION 1 to Section 141.0(b)3A: Window Films. Applied window films installed as part of an
alteration complies with the U-factor, RSHGC and VT requirements of TABLE 141.0-E.
EXCEPTION 2 to Section 141.0(b)3A: The requirements of Section 120.2(i) shall not apply to
B. The standard design for an altered component shall be the higher efficiency of existing conditions or
the requirements of Section 141.0(b)2. For components not being altered, the standard design shall be
based on the unaltered existing conditions such that the standard and proposed designs for these
SECTION 141.0 – ADDITIONS, ALTERATIONS, AND REPAIRS TO EXISTING NONRESIDENTIAL, HIGH-RISE
RESIDENTIAL, AND HOTEL/MOTEL BUILDINGS, TO EXISTING OUTDOOR LIGHTING, AND TO
INTERNALLY AND EXTERNALLY ILLUMINATED SIGNS
2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards Page 257
C. When the third party verification option is specified, all components proposed for alteration, for which
the additional credit is taken, must be verified. The Executive Director shall determine the
qualifications required by the third party inspector.
TABLE 141.0-E – The Standard Design For An Altered Component
Standard Design Without Third Party Standard Design With Third Party
Altered Component Verification of Existing Conditions Verification of Existing Conditions Shall
Insulation, and Floor/Soffit The requirements of Section 141.0(b)1.
The allowed glass area shall
a.The proposed glass area: or The U-factor and RSHGC requirements
The existing U-factor and RSHGC levels.
Space-Conditioning System The requirements of Sections 141.0(b)2C, 141.0(b)2Di or Section 141.0(b)2Dii, and
Equipment and Ducts Section 141.0(b)2E.
The existing fenestration in the alteration
The U-factor of 0.40 and SHGC value of
Window Film shall be based on TABLE 110.6-A and
Service Water Heating Systems The requirements of Section 140.5 without solar water heating requirements.
Roofing Products The requirements of Section 141.0(b)2B.
Lighting System The requirements of Sections 141.0(b)2F, through 141.0(b)2K.
All Other Measures The proposed efficiency levels.
D. The proposed design shall be based on the actual values of the altered components.
1. If an existing component must be replaced with a new component, that component is considered an
altered component for the purpose of determining the energy budget and must therefore meet the
2. The standard design assumes the same geometry and orientation as the proposed design.
3. The “existing efficiency level” modeling rules, including situations where nameplate data is not
available, are described in the Nonresidential ACM Reference Manual.
EXCEPTION 1 to Section 141.0(b): When heating, cooling or service water heating for an alteration are
provided by expanding existing systems, the existing systems and equipment need not comply with Sections
EXCEPTION 2 to Section 141.0(b): When existing heating, cooling or service water heating systems or
components are moved within a building, the existing systems or components need not comply with Sections
EXCEPTION 3 to Section 141.0(b): Where an existing system with electric reheat is expanded when adding
variable air volume (VAV) boxes to serve an alteration, total electric reheat capacity may be expanded not to
exceed 20 percent of the existing installed electric capacity in any one permit and the system need not comply
with Section 140.4(g). Additional electric reheat capacity in excess of 20 percent may be added subject to the
SECTION 141.0 – ADDITIONS, ALTERATIONS, AND REPAIRS TO EXISTING NONRESIDENTIAL, HIGH-RISE
RESIDENTIAL, AND HOTEL/MOTEL BUILDINGS, TO EXISTING OUTDOOR LIGHTING, AND TO
INTERNALLY AND EXTERNALLY ILLUMINATED SIGNS
Page 258 2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards
EXCEPTION 4 to Section 141.0(b): The requirements of Section 120.2(i) shall not apply to alterations of
NOTE: Relocation or moving of a relocatable public school building is not, by itself, considered an alteration
for the purposes of Title 24, Part 6.
(c) Repairs. Repairs shall not increase the preexisting energy consumption of the repaired component, system, or
(d) Alternate Method of Compliance. Any addition, alteration, or repair may comply with the requirements of
Title 24, Part 6 by meeting the applicable requirements for the entire building.
Table 141.0-F – Control Requirements for Indoor Lighting System Alterations
Control Specifications Projects complying Projects complying
with Section with Sections
Manual Area 130.1(a)1 Required Required
130.1(a)3 Only required for new Only required for new
or completely replaced or completely replaced
Multilevel Controls 130.1(b) Required Not Required
Controls only required for new only required for new or
or completely replaced completely replaced
Daylighting 130.1(d) Required Not Required
Demand Responsive 130.1(e) Required Not Required
SECTION 141.0 – ADDITIONS, ALTERATIONS, AND REPAIRS TO EXISTING NONRESIDENTIAL, HIGH-RISE
RESIDENTIAL, AND HOTEL/MOTEL BUILDINGS, TO EXISTING OUTDOOR LIGHTING, AND TO
INTERNALLY AND EXTERNALLY ILLUMINATED SIGNS
2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards Page 259
SECTION 141.1 – REQUIREMENTS FOR COVERED PROCESSES IN
Covered processes in additions or alterations to existing buildings that will be nonresidential, high-rise residential,
and hotel/motel occupancies shall comply with the applicable subsections of Section 120.6 and 140.9.
Lab and Process Facility Exhaust Systems. All newly installed fan systems for a laboratory or process facility
exhaust system greater than 10,000 CFM shall meet the requirements of Section 140.9(c).
NOTE: For alterations that change the occupancy classification of the building, the requirements of Section 141.1
apply to the occupancy that will exist after the alterations.
SECTION 141.1 – REQUIREMENTS FOR COVERED PROCESSES IN ADDITIONS, ALTERATIONS TO
EXISTING NONRESIDENTIAL, HIGH-RISE RESIDENTIAL, AND HOTEL/MOTEL BUILDINGS
Page 260 2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards
SECTION 141.1 – REQUIREMENTS FOR COVERED PROCESSES IN ADDITIONS, ALTERATIONS TO
EXISTING NONRESIDENTIAL, HIGH-RISE RESIDENTIAL, AND HOTEL/MOTEL BUILDINGS
2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards Page 261
LOW-RISE RESIDENTIAL BUILDINGS – MANDATORY
SECTION 150.0 – MANDATORY FEATURES AND DEVICES
Low-rise residential buildings shall comply with the applicable requirements of Sections 150(a) through 150.0(r).
NOTE: The requirements of Sections 150.0(a) through 150.0(r) apply to newly constructed buildings. Sections
150.2(a) and 150.2(b) specify which requirements of Sections 150.0(a) through 150.0(r) also apply to additions or
(a) Ceiling and Rafter Roof Insulation. The opaque portions of ceilings and roofs separating conditioned spaces
from unconditioned spaces or ambient air shall meet the requirements of Items 1 through 3 below:
1. Shall be insulated to achieve a weighted average U-factor not exceeding U-0.043 or shall be insulated
between wood-framing members with insulation resulting in an installed thermal resistance of R-22 or
greater for the insulation alone. For vented attics, the mandatory insulation shall be installed at the ceiling
level; for unvented attics, the mandatory insulation shall be placed at either ceiling or roof level; and
EXCEPTION to Section 150.0(a)1: Ceilings and rafter roofs in an alteration shall be insulated to achieve a
weighted average U-factor not exceeding 0.054 or shall be insulated between wood-framing members with
insulation resulting in an installed thermal resistance of R-19 or greater.
2. Attic access doors shall have permanently attached insulation using adhesive or mechanical fasteners. The
attic access shall be gasketed to prevent air leakage; and
3. Insulation shall be installed in direct contact with a continuous roof or ceiling which is sealed to limit
infiltration and exfiltration as specified in Section 110.7, including but not limited to placing insulation
either above or below the roof deck or on top of a drywall ceiling.
(b) Loose-fill Insulation. When loose-fill insulation is installed, the minimum installed weight per square foot shall
conform with the insulation manufacturer's installed design weight per square foot at the manufacturer's labeled
(c) Wall Insulation. Opaque portions of above grade walls separating conditioned spaces from unconditioned
spaces or ambient air shall meet the following requirements:
1. 2×4 inch framing shall have an overall assembly U-factor not exceeding U-0.102.
EXCEPTION to Section 150.0(c)1: Existing walls already insulated to a U-factor not exceeding U-0.110
or already insulated between framing members with insulation having an installed thermal resistance of R-
2. 2×6 inch or greater framing shall have an overall assembly U-factor not exceeding U-0.071.
3. Opaque nonframed assemblies shall have an overall assembly U-factor not exceeding U-0.102.
4. Bay or Bow Window roofs and floors shall be insulated to meet the wall insulation requirements of TABLE
5. Masonry walls shall be insulated to meet the wall insulation requirements of TABLE 150.1-A or B.
6. In wood framed assemblies, compliance with U-factors may be demonstrated by installing wall insulation
(d) Raised-floor Insulation. Raised floors separating conditioned space from unconditioned space or ambient air
shall have an overall assembly U-factor not exceeding U-0.037. In a wood framed assembly, compliance with
the U-factor may be demonstrated by installing insulation with an R-value of 19 or greater.
SECTION 150.0 – MANDATORY FEATURES AND DEVICES
Page 262 2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards
EXCEPTION to Section 150.0(d): A building with a controlled ventilation or unvented crawl space may
omit raised floor insulation if all of the following are met:
A. The foundation walls are insulated to meet the wall insulation minimums as shown in TABLE 150.1-A
B. A Class I or Class II vapor retarder is placed over the entire floor of the crawl space; and
C. Vents between the crawl space and outside air are fitted with automatically operated louvers that are
D. The requirements in Reference Residential Appendix RA4.5.1.
(e) Installation of Fireplaces, Decorative Gas Appliances and Gas Logs. If a masonry or factory-built fireplace
is installed, it shall comply with Section 110.5, Section 4.503 of Part 11, and shall have the following:
1. Closable metal or glass doors covering the entire opening of the firebox; and
2. A combustion air intake to draw air from the outside of the building, which is at least 6 square inches in
area and is equipped with a readily accessible, operable, and tight-fitting damper or combustion-air control
EXCEPTION to Section 150.0(e)1B: An outside combustion-air intake is not required if the fireplace will
be installed over concrete slab flooring and the fireplace will not be located on an exterior wall.
3. A flue damper with a readily accessible control.
EXCEPTION to Section 150.0(e)1C: When a gas log, log lighter, or decorative gas appliance is installed
in a fireplace, the flue damper shall be blocked open if required by the CMC or the manufacturer's
(f) Slab Edge Insulation. Material used for slab edge insulation shall meet the following minimum specifications:
1. Water absorption rate for the insulation material alone without facings no greater than 0.3 percent when
tested in accordance with Test Method A – 24-Hour-Immersion of ASTM C272.
2. Water vapor permeance no greater than 2.0 perm/inch when tested in accordance with ASTM E96.
3. Concrete slab perimeter insulation shall be protected from physical damage and ultraviolet light
4. Insulation for a heated slab floor shall meet the requirements of Section 110.8(g).
1. In Climate Zones 1-16, the earth floor of unvented crawl space shall be covered with a Class I or Class II
vapor retarder. This requirement shall also apply to controlled ventilation crawl space for buildings
complying with the Exception to Section 150.0(d).
2. In Climate Zones 14 and 16, a Class I or Class II vapor retarder shall be installed on the conditioned space
side of all insulation in all exterior walls, vented attics and unvented attics with air-permeable insulation.
1. Building Cooling and Heating Loads. Building heating and cooling loads shall be determined using a
method based on any one of the following:
A. The ASHRAE Handbook, Equipment Volume, Applications Volume, and Fundamentals Volume; or
B. The SMACNA Residential Comfort System Installation Standards Manual; or
The cooling and heating loads are two of the criteria that shall be used for equipment sizing and selection.
NOTE: Heating systems are required to have a minimum heating capacity adequate to meet the minimum
requirements of the CBC. The furnace output capacity and other specifications are published in the
Commission's directory of certified equipment or other directories approved by the Commission.
SECTION 150.0 – MANDATORY FEATURES AND DEVICES
2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards Page 263
2. Design conditions. For the purpose of sizing the space-conditioning (HVAC) system, the indoor design
temperatures shall be 68°F for heating and 75°F for cooling. Outdoor design conditions shall be selected
from Reference Joint Appendix JA2, which is based on data from the ASHRAE Climatic Data for Region
X.The outdoor design temperatures for heating shall be no lower than the Heating Winter Median of
Extremes values. The outdoor design temperatures for cooling shall be no greater than the 1.0 percent
Cooling Dry Bulb and Mean Coincident Wet Bulb values.
A. Clearances. Installed air conditioner and heat pump outdoor condensing units shall have a clearance of
at least five (5) feet (1.5 meters) from the outlet of any dryer vent.
B. Liquid Line Drier. Installed air conditioner and heat pump systems shall be equipped with liquid line
A. Temperature Rise. Central forced-air heating furnace installations shall be configured to operate in
conformance with the furnace manufacturer's maximum inlet-to-outlet temperature rise specifications.
(i) Thermostats. All heating or cooling systems, including heat pumps, not controlled by a central energy
management control system (EMCS) shall have a setback thermostat, as specified in Section 110.2(c).
(j) Insulation for Piping and Tanks.
1. Storage tank insulation. Unfired hot water tanks, such as storage tanks and backup storage tanks for solar
water-heating systems, shall be externally wrapped with insulation having an installed thermal resistance of
R-12 or greater or have internal insulation of at least R-16 and a label on the exterior of the tank showing
2. Water piping, solar water-heating system piping, and space conditioning system line insulation
thickness and conductivity. Piping shall be insulated as follows:
A. All domestic hot water piping shall be insulated as specified in Section 609.11 of the California
Plumbing Code. In addition, the following piping conditions shall have a minimum insulation wall
thickness of 1 inch or a minimum insulation R-value of 7.7:
i. The first 5 feet (1.5 meters) of cold water pipes from the storage tank.
ii. All hot water piping with a nominal diameter equal to or greater than 3/4 inch (19 millimeter) and
iii. All hot water piping with a nominal diameter less than 3/4 inch that is:
a. Associated with a domestic hot water recirculation system;
b. From the heating source to the kitchen fixtures;
c. From the heating source to a storage tank or between storage tanks; or
B. Piping for space conditioning systems, solar water-heating system collector loop, and distribution
piping for steam and hydronic heating system, shall meet the requirements of Section 120.3(c).
EXCEPTION 1 to Section 150.0(j)2: Factory-installed piping within space-conditioning equipment
EXCEPTION 2 to Section 150.0(j)2: Piping that penetrates framing members shall not be required to have
pipe insulation for the distance of the framing penetration. Piping that penetrates metal framing shall use
grommets, plugs, wrapping or other insulating material to assure that no contact is made with the metal
framing. Insulation shall butt securely against all framing members.
EXCEPTION 3 to Section 150.0(j)2: Piping installed in interior or exterior walls shall not be required to
have pipe insulation if all of the requirements are met for compliance with Quality Insulation Installation
(QII) as specified in the Reference Residential Appendix RA3.5.
SECTION 150.0 – MANDATORY FEATURES AND DEVICES
Page 264 2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards
EXCEPTION 4 to Section 150.0(j)2: Piping surrounded with a minimum of 1 inch of wall insulation, 2
inches of crawl space insulation, or 4 inches of attic insulation, shall not be required to have pipe insulation.
3. Insulation Protection. Pipe insulation shall meet the insulation protection requirements of Section
A. Luminaire Efficacy. All installed luminaires shall meet the requirements in TABLE 150.0-A.
B. Blank Electrical Boxes. The number of electrical boxes that are more than 5 feet above the finished
floor and do not contain a luminaire or other device shall be no greater than the number of bedrooms.
These electrical boxes must be served by a dimmer, vacancy sensor control, or fan speed control.
C. Recessed Downlight Luminaires in Ceilings. In addition to complying with 150.0(k)1A, luminaires
recessed into ceilings shall meet all of the following requirements:
i. Be listed, as defined in Section 100.1, for zero clearance insulation contact (IC) by Underwriters
Laboratories or other nationally recognized testing/rating laboratory; and
ii. Have a label that certifies the luminaire is airtight with air leakage less than 2.0 CFM at 75 Pascals
when tested in accordance with ASTM E283. An exhaust fan housing shall not be required to be
iii. Be sealed with a gasket or caulk between the luminaire housing and ceiling, and have all air leak
paths between conditioned and unconditioned spaces sealed with a gasket or caulk; and
iv. For luminaires with hardwired ballasts or drivers, allow ballast or driver maintenance and
replacement to be readily accessible to building occupants from below the ceiling without
requiring the cutting of holes in the ceiling; and
v. Shall not contain screw base sockets.
D. Electronic Ballasts for Fluorescent Lamps. Ballasts for fluorescent lamps rated 13 watts or greater
shall be electronic and shall have an output frequency no less than 20 kHz.
E. Night Lights, Step Lights and Path Lights. Night lights, step lights and path lights shall not be
required to comply with Table 150.0-A or be controlled by vacancy sensors provided they are rated to
consume no more than 5 watts of power and emit no more than 150 lumens.
F. Lighting Integral to Exhaust Fans. Lighting integral to exhaust fans shall meet the applicable
EXCEPTION to Section 150.0(k)1F: Lighting installed by the manufacturer in kitchen exhaust hoods.
G. Screw based luminaires. Screw based luminaires shall contain lamps that comply with Reference Joint
EXCEPTION to Section 150.0(k)1G: Luminaires with hard-wired ballasts for high intensity discharge
H. Light Sources in Enclosed or Recessed Luminaires. Lamps and other separable light sources that are
not compliant with the JA8 elevated temperature requirements, including marking requirements, shall
not be installed in enclosed or recessed luminaires.
I. Light Sources in Drawers, Cabinets, and Linen Closets. Light sources internal to drawers, cabinetry
or linen closets shall not be required to comply with Table 150.0-A or be controlled by vacancy sensors
provided that they are rated to consume no more than 5 watts of power and emit no more than 150
lumens, and are equipped with controls that automatically turn the lighting off when the drawer, cabinet
2. Interior Lighting Switching Devices and Controls.
A. All forward phase cut dimmers used with LED light sources shall comply with NEMA SSL 7A.
B. Exhaust fans shall be controlled separately from lighting systems.
SECTION 150.0 – MANDATORY FEATURES AND DEVICES
2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards Page 265
EXCEPTION to Section 150.0(k)2B: Lighting integral to an exhaust fan may be on the same control
as the fan provided the lighting can be turned OFF in accordance with the applicable provisions in
Section 150.0(k)2 while allowing the fan to continue to operate.
C. Lighting shall have readily accessible wall-mounted controls that allow the lighting to be manually
EXCEPTION to Section 150.0(k)2C: Ceiling fans may provide control of integrated lighting via a
D. Lighting controls and equipment shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions.
E. No controls shall bypass a dimmer, occupant sensor or vacancy sensor function where that dimmer or
sensor has been installed to comply with Section 150.0(k).
F. Lighting controls shall comply with the applicable requirements of Section 110.9.
G. An Energy Management Control System (EMCS) may be used to comply with control requirements in
Section 150.0(k) if at a minimum it provides the functionality of the specified controls in accordance
with Section 110.9, meets the installation certificate requirements in Section 130.4, meets the EMCS
requirements in Section 130.0(e), and complies with all other applicable requirements in Section
H. A multiscene programmable controller may be used to comply with dimmer requirements in Section
150.0(k) if at a minimum it provides the functionality of a dimmer in accordance with Section 110.9,
and complies with all other applicable requirements in Section 150.0(k)2.
I. In bathrooms, garages, laundry rooms, and utility rooms, at least one luminaire in each of these spaces
shall be controlled by an occupant or vacancy sensor providing automatic-off functionality. If an
occupant sensor is installed, it shall be initially configured to manual-on operation using the manual
control required under Section 150.0(k)2C.
J. Luminaires that are or contain light sources that meet Reference Joint Appendix JA8 requirements for
dimming, and that are not controlled by occupancy or vacancy sensors, shall have dimming controls.
EXCEPTION 1 to Section 150.0(k)2J: Luminaires in closets less than 70 square feet.
K. Undercabinet lighting shall be controlled separately from ceiling-installed lighting such that one can be
turned on without turning on the other.
3. Residential Outdoor Lighting. In addition to meeting the requirements of Section 150.0(k)1A, luminaires
providing residential outdoor lighting shall meet the following requirements, as applicable:
A. For single-family residential buildings, outdoor lighting permanently mounted to a residential building
or to other buildings on the same lot shall meet the requirement in item i and the requirements in either
i. Controlled by a manual ON and OFF switch that permits the automatic actions of items ii or iii
ii. Controlled by a photocell and either a motion sensor or an automatic time switch control; or
iii. Controlled by an astronomical time clock control.
Controls that override to ON shall not be allowed unless the override automatically returns the
automatic control to its normal operation within 6 hours. An energy management control system that
provides the specified lighting control functionality and complies with all requirements applicable to
the specified controls may be used to meet these requirements.
B. For low-rise residential buildings with four or more dwelling units, outdoor lighting for private patios,
entrances, balconies, porches; and residential parking lots and carports with less than eight vehicles per
site shall comply with either:
SECTION 150.0 – MANDATORY FEATURES AND DEVICES
Page 266 2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards
C. For low-rise residential buildings with four or more dwelling units, any outdoor lighting for residential
parking lots or carports with a total of eight or more vehicles per site and any outdoor lighting not
regulated by Section 150.0(k)3B shall comply with the applicable requirements in Sections 110.9,
4. Internally illuminated address signs. Internally illuminated address signs shall either:
B. Consume no more than 5 watts of power.
5. Residential Garages for Eight or More Vehicles. Lighting for residential parking garages for eight or
more vehicles shall comply with the applicable requirements for nonresidential garages in Sections 110.9,
6. Interior Common Areas of Low-rise Multifamily Residential Buildings.
A. In a low-rise multifamily residential building where the total interior common area in a single building
equals 20 percent or less of the floor area, permanently installed lighting for the interior common areas
in that building shall comply with Table 150.0-A and be controlled by an occupant sensor.
B. In a low-rise multifamily residential building where the total interior common area in a single building
equals more than 20 percent of the floor area, permanently installed lighting for the interior common
ii. Lighting installed in corridors and stairwells shall be controlled by occupant sensors that reduce
the lighting power in each space by at least 50 percent. The occupant sensors shall be capable of
turning the light fully on and off from all designed paths of ingress and egress.
(m) Air-Distribution and Ventilation System Ducts, Plenums, and Fans.
A. All air-distribution system ducts and plenums, including, but not limited to, mechanical closets and air-
ANSI/SMACNA-006-2006 HVAC Duct Construction Standards Metal and Flexible 3rd Edition,
B. Portions of supply-air and return-air ducts and plenums of a space heating or cooling system shall either
ii. a minimum installed level of R-4.2 when the duct system is located entirely in conditioned space as
confirmed through field verification and diagnostic testing in accordance with the requirements of
EXCEPTION 1 to Section 150.0(m)1B: Portions of the duct system located in wall cavities are not
required to be insulated if the following conditions are met:
i. The cavity, duct or plenum is located entirely inside the building’s thermal envelope as confirmed
ii. At all locations where portions of non-insulated cavities, ducts, or plenums make a transition into
unconditioned space, the transition shall be air-sealed to prevent air infiltration into the cavity and
be insulated to a minimum of R-6 as confirmed by visual inspection.
EXCEPTION 2 to Section 150.0(m)1B: Portions of the duct system completely exposed and
surrounded by directly conditioned space are not required to be insulated.
C. Connections of metal ducts and the inner core of flexible ducts shall be mechanically fastened.
SECTION 150.0 – MANDATORY FEATURES AND DEVICES
2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards Page 267
D. Openings shall be sealed with mastic, tape, or other duct-closure system that meets the applicable
requirements of UL 181, UL 181A or UL 181B or aerosol sealant that meets the requirements of UL
723. If mastic or tape is used to seal openings greater than 1/4 inch, the combination of mastic and
either mesh or tape shall be used.
E. Building cavities, support platforms for air handlers, and plenums designed or constructed with
materials other than sealed sheet metal, duct board or flexible duct shall not be used for conveying
conditioned air. Building cavities and support platforms may contain ducts. Ducts installed in cavities
and support platforms shall not be compressed to cause reductions in the cross-sectional area of the
EXCEPTION to Section 150.0(m)1: Ducts and fans integral to a wood heater or fireplace.
A. All factory-fabricated duct systems shall comply with UL 181 for ducts and closure systems, including
collars, connections, and splices, and be labeled as complying with UL 181. UL 181 testing may be
performed by UL laboratories or a laboratory approved by the Executive Director.
B. All pressure-sensitive tapes, heat-activated tapes, and mastics used in the manufacture of rigid
fiberglass ducts shall comply with UL 181 and UL 181A.
C. All pressure-sensitive tapes and mastics used with flexible ducts shall comply with UL 181 and UL
D. Joints and seams of duct systems and their components shall not be sealed with cloth-back rubber
adhesive duct tapes unless such tape is used in combination with mastic and drawbands.
A. Factory-made rigid fiberglass and flexible ducts for field-fabricated duct systems shall comply with UL
181.All pressure-sensitive tapes, mastics, aerosol sealants, or other closure systems used for installing
field-fabricated duct systems shall meet the applicable requirements of UL 181, UL 181A, and UL
i. Sealants shall comply with the applicable requirements of UL 181, UL 181A, and UL 181B, and
ii. Sealants for interior applications shall be tested in accordance with ASTM C731 and D2202,
iii. Sealants for exterior applications shall be tested in accordance with ASTM C731, C732, and
iv. Sealants and meshes shall be rated for exterior use.
C. Pressure-sensitive tape. Pressure-sensitive tapes shall comply with the applicable requirements of UL
D. Joints and seams of duct systems and their components shall not be sealed with cloth-back rubber
adhesive duct tapes unless such tape is used in combination with mastic and drawbands.
E. Drawbands used with flexible duct.
i. Drawbands shall be either stainless-steel worm-drive hose clamps or UV-resistant nylon duct ties.
ii. Drawbands shall have a minimum tensile strength rating of 150 pounds.
iii. Drawbands shall be tightened as recommended by the manufacturer with an adjustable tensioning
i. Aerosol sealants shall meet the requirements of UL 723 and be applied according to manufacturer
SECTION 150.0 – MANDATORY FEATURES AND DEVICES
Page 268 2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards
ii. Tapes or mastics used in combination with aerosol sealing shall meet the requirements of this
4. Duct Insulation R-value Ratings. All duct insulation product R-values shall be based on insulation only
(excluding air films, vapor retarder, or other duct components) and tested C-values at 75°F mean
temperature at the installed thickness, in accordance with ASTM C518 or ASTM C177, incorporated herein
by reference, and certified pursuant to Section 110.8.
5. Duct Insulation Thickness. The installed thickness of duct insulation used to determine its R-value shall be
A. For duct board, duct liner, and factory-made rigid ducts not normally subjected to compression, the
nominal insulation thickness shall be used.
B. For duct wrap, installed thickness shall be assumed to be 75 percent (25 percent compression) of
C. For factory-made flexible air ducts, the installed thickness shall be determined by dividing the
difference between the actual outside diameter and nominal inside diameter by two.
6. Duct Labeling. Insulated flexible duct products installed to meet this requirement shall include labels, in
maximum intervals of 3 feet, showing the thermal performance R-value for the duct insulation itself
(excluding air films, vapor retarders or other duct components), based on the tests in Section 150.0(m)4 and
the installed thickness determined by Section 150.0(m)5C.
7. Backdraft Dampers. All fan systems, regardless of volumetric capacity, that exchange air between the
building conditioned space and the outside of the building shall be provided with backdraft or automatic
dampers to prevent unintended air leakage through the fan system when the fan system is not operating.
8. Gravity Ventilation Dampers. All gravity ventilating systems that serve conditioned space shall be
provided with either automatic or readily accessible, manually operated dampers in all openings to the
outside except combustion inlet and outlet air openings and elevator shaft vents.
9. Protection of Insulation. Insulation shall be protected from damage, including that due to sunlight,
moisture, equipment maintenance, and wind but not limited to the following: Insulation exposed to weather
shall be suitable for outdoor service, e.g., protected by aluminum, sheet metal, painted canvas, or plastic
cover. Cellular foam insulation shall be protected as above or painted with a coating that is water retardant
and provides shielding from solar radiation that can cause degradation of the material.
10. Porous Inner Core Flex Duct. Flexible ducts having porous inner cores shall have a non-porous layer or
air barrier between the inner core and the outer vapor barrier.
11. Duct System Sealing and Leakage Testing. When space conditioning systems utilize forced air duct
systems to supply conditioned air to an occupiable space, the ducts shall be sealed, as confirmed through
field verification and diagnostic testing, in accordance with all applicable procedures specified in Reference
Residential Appendix RA3.1, and the leakage compliance criteria specified in Reference Residential
Appendix TABLE RA3.1-2, and conforming to one of the following Subsections A, B, or C as applicable:
A. For single family dwellings and townhouses with the air-handling unit installed and the ducts connected
directly to the air handler, the total leakage of the duct system shall not exceed 5 percent of the nominal
system air handler airflow as determined utilizing the procedures in Reference Residential Appendix
B. For single family dwellings and townhouses at the rough-in stage of construction prior to installation of
i. Air-handling unit installed. If the air-handling unit is installed and the ducts are connected
directly to the air handler, the total leakage of the duct system shall not exceed 5 percent of the
nominal system air handler airflow as determined utilizing the procedures in Reference Residential
ii. Air-handling unit not yet installed. If the air-handling unit is not yet installed, the total leakage
of the duct system shall not exceed 4 percent of the nominal system air handler airflow as
determined utilizing the procedures in Reference Residential Appendix Sections RA3.1.4.3.2,
SECTION 150.0 – MANDATORY FEATURES AND DEVICES
2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards Page 269
C. For multifamily dwellings with the air-handling unit installed and the ducts connected directly to the air
i. The total leakage of the duct system shall not exceed 12 percent of the nominal system air handler
airflow as determined utilizing the procedures in Reference Residential Appendix Section
ii. The duct system leakage to outside shall not exceed 6 percent of the nominal system air handler
airflow as determined utilizing the procedures in Reference Residential Appendix Section
A. System types specified in subsections i, ii, and iii shall be provided with air filters in accordance with
also comply with Section 150.0(m)12E.
i. Mechanical space conditioning systems that supply air to an occupiable space through ductwork
ii. Mechanical supply-only ventilation systems that provide outside air to an occupiable space.
iii. The supply side of mechanical balanced ventilation systems, including heat recovery ventilation
systems, and energy recovery ventilation systems that provide outside air to an occupiable space.
EXCEPTION 1 to Section 150.0(m)12A: Evaporative coolers are exempt from the air filtration
i. The system shall be designed to ensure that all recirculated air and all outdoor air supplied to the
occupiable space is filtered before passing through any system’s thermal conditioning components.
EXCEPTION 1 to Section 150.0(m)12Bi: For heat recovery ventilators and energy recovery
ventilators the location of the filters required by Section 150.0(m)12 may be downstream of a
system thermal conditioning component, provided the system is equipped with ancillary filtration
upstream of the system’s thermal conditioning component.
ii. All systems shall be designed to accommodate the clean-filter pressure drop imposed by the
system air filter(s). The design airflow rate, and maximum allowable clean-filter pressure drop at
the design airflow rate applicable to each air filter shall be determined and reported on labels
Systems specified in Section 150.0(m)12Ai shall be equipped with air filters that meet either
a. Nominal two-inch minimum depth filter(s) shall be sized by the system designer, or
b. Nominal one-inch minimum depth filter(s) shall be allowed if the filter(s) are sized according
to Equation 150.0-A, based on a maximum face velocity of 150 ft per minute, and according
to the maximum allowable clean-filter pressure drop specified in Section 150.0(m)12Dii.
A = air filter face area, the product of air filter nominal length × nominal width, ft2
Q = design airflow rate for the air filter, ft3/min
V = air filter face velocity ≤ 150, ft/min
iii. All system air filters shall be located and installed in such a manner as to be accessible for regular
SECTION 150.0 – MANDATORY FEATURES AND DEVICES
Page 270 2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards
iv. All system air filter installation locations shall be labeled to disclose the applicable design airflow
rate and the maximum allowable clean-filter pressure drop. The labels shall be permanently affixed
to the air filter installation location, readily legible, and visible to a person replacing the air filter.
C. Air Filter Efficiency. The system shall be provided with air filters having a designated efficiency equal
to or greater than MERV 13 when tested in accordance with ASHRAE Standard 52.2, or a particle size
efficiency rating equal to or greater than 50 percent in the 0.30-1.0 μm range, and equal to or greater
than 85 percent in the 1.0-3.0 μm range when tested in accordance with AHRI Standard 680.
D. Air Filter Pressure Drop. All systems shall be provided with air filters that conform to the applicable
maximum allowable clean-filter pressure drop specified in subsections i, ii, iii, or iv below, when tested
using ASHRAE Standard 52.2, or as rated using AHRI Standard 680, for the applicable design airflow
rates for the system air filters.
i. The maximum allowable clean-filter pressure drop determined by the system design for the
nominal two-inch minimum depth air filter required by Section 150.0(m)12Biia, or
ii. A maximum of 25 PA (0.1 inches water) clean-filter pressure drop shall be allowed for a nominal
one-inch depth air filter sized according to Section 150.0(m)12Biib, or
iii. For systems specified in 150.0(m)12Aii, and 150.0(m)12Aiii, the maximum allowable clean filter
pressure drop determined by the system design.
iv. If EXCEPTION 1 to Section 150.0(m)13B or D is utilized for compliance with cooling system
airflow rate and fan efficacy requirements, the clean-filter pressure drop for the system air filter
shall conform to the requirements given in TABLE 150.0-B or 150.0-C.
E. Air Filter Product Labeling. Systems described in 150.0(m)12Ai shall be equipped with air filters
that have been labeled by the manufacturer to disclose the efficiency and pressure drop ratings that
demonstrate conformance with Sections 150.0(m)12C and 150.0(m)12D.
13. Space Conditioning System Airflow Rate and Fan Efficacy. Space conditioning systems that utilize
forced air ducts to supply cooling to an occupiable space shall:
A. Static Pressure Probe. Have a hole for the placement of a static pressure probe (HSPP), or a
permanently installed static pressure probe (PSPP) in the supply plenum downstream of the air
conditioning evaporator coil. The size, location, and labeling of the HSPP or PSPP shall conform to the
requirements specified in Reference Residential Appendix RA3.3.1.1 as confirmed by field verification
EXCEPTION to 150.0(m)13A: Systems that cannot conform to the specifications for hole location in
Reference Residential Appendix Figure RA3.3-1 shall not be required to provide holes as described in
B. Single Zone Central Forced Air Systems. Demonstrate, in every control mode, airflow greater than or
equal to 350 CFM per ton of nominal cooling capacity through the return grilles, and an air-handling
unit fan efficacy less than or equal to the maximum W/CFM specified in subsections i or ii below. The
airflow rate and fan efficacy requirements in this section shall be confirmed by field verification and
diagnostic testing in accordance with the procedures given in Reference Residential Appendix RA3.3.
i. 0.45 W/CFM for gas furnace air-handling units.
ii. 0.58 W/CFM for air-handling units that are not gas furnaces.
C. Zonally Controlled Central Forced Air Systems. Zonally controlled central forced air cooling
systems shall be capable of simultaneously delivering, in every zonal control mode, an airflow from the
dwelling, through the air handler fan and delivered to the dwelling, of greater than or equal to 350 CFM
per ton of nominal cooling capacity, and operating at an air-handling unit fan efficacy of less than or
equal to the maximum W/CFM specified in subsections i or ii below. The airflow rate and fan efficacy
requirements in this section shall be confirmed by field verification and diagnostic testing in
accordance with the applicable procedures specified in Reference Residential Appendix RA3.3.
i. 0.45 W/CFM for gas furnace air-handling units.
ii. 0.58 W/CFM for air-handling units that are not gas furnaces.
SECTION 150.0 – MANDATORY FEATURES AND DEVICES
2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards Page 271
D. Small Duct High Velocity Forced Air Systems. Demonstrate, in every control mode, airflow greater
than or equal to 250 CFM per ton of nominal cooling capacity through the return grilles, and an air-
handling unit fan efficacy less than or equal to 0.62 W/CFM as confirmed by field verification and
diagnostic testing in accordance with the procedures given in Reference Residential Appendix RA3.3
EXCEPTION 1 to Section 150.0(m)13B and D: Standard ducted systems without zoning dampers
may comply by meeting the applicable requirements in TABLE 150.0-B or 150.0-C as confirmed by
field verification and diagnostic testing in accordance with the procedures in Reference Residential
Appendix Sections RA3.1.4.4 and RA3.1.4.5. The design clean-filter pressure drop requirements
specified by Section 150.0(m)12Div for the system air filter(s) shall conform to the requirements given
EXCEPTION 2 to Section 150.0(m)13B and D: Multispeed compressor systems or variable speed
compressor systems shall verify airflow (cfm/ton) and fan efficacy (Watt/cfm) for system operation at
the maximum compressor speed and the maximum air handler fan speed.
EXCEPTION 3 to Section 150.0(m)13B: Gas furnace air-handling units manufactured prior to July 3,
2019 shall comply with a fan efficacy value less than or equal to 0.58 w/cfm as confirmed by field
verification and diagnostic testing in accordance with the procedures given in Reference Residential
EXCEPTION 1 to Section 150.0(m)13C: Multispeed or variable speed compressor systems, or single
speed compressor systems that utilize the performance compliance approach, shall demonstrate
compliance with the airflow (cfm/ton) and fan efficacy (Watt/cfm) requirements of Section
150.0(m)13C by operating the system at maximum compressor capacity and system fan speed with all
zones calling for conditioning, rather than in every zonal control mode.
EXCEPTION 2 to Section 150.0(m)13C: Gas furnace air-handling units manufactured prior to July 3,
2019 shall comply with a fan efficacy value less than or equal to 0.58 w/cfm as confirmed by field
verification and diagnostic testing in accordance with the procedures given in Reference Residential
1. Systems using gas or propane water heaters to serve individual dwelling units shall include the following
A. A dedicated 125 volt, 20 amp electrical receptacle that is connected to the electric panel with a 120/240
volt 3 conductor, 10 AWG copper branch circuit, within 3 feet from the water heater and accessible to
the water heater with no obstructions. In addition, all of the following:
i. Both ends of the unused conductor shall be labeled with the word “spare” and be electrically
ii. A reserved single pole circuit breaker space in the electrical panel adjacent to the circuit breaker
for the branch circuit in A above and labeled with the words “Future 240V Use”; and
B. A Category III or IV vent, or a Type B vent with straight pipe between the outside termination and the
space where the water heater is installed; and
C. A condensate drain that is no more than 2 inches higher than the base of the installed water heater, and
allows natural draining without pump assistance; and
D. A gas supply line with a capacity of at least 200,000 Btu/hr.
2. Water heating recirculation loops serving multiple dwelling units shall meet the requirements of Section
3. Solar water-heating systems and collectors shall be certified and rated by the Solar Rating and Certification
Corporation (SRCC), the International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials, Research and
Testing (IAPMO R&T), or by a listing agency that is approved by the Executive Director.
4. Instantaneous water heaters with an input rating greater than 6.8 kBTU/hr (2kW) shall meet the
SECTION 150.0 – MANDATORY FEATURES AND DEVICES
Page 272 2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards
(o) Requirements for Ventilation and Indoor Air Quality. All dwelling units shall meet the requirements of
ASHRAE Standard 62.2, Ventilation and Acceptable Indoor Air Quality in Residential Buildings subject to the
amendments specified in Section 150.0(o)1 below. All dwelling units shall comply with Section 150.0(o)2
A. Window operation is not a permissible method of providing the dwelling unit ventilation airflow
B. Continuous operation of central forced air system air handlers used in central fan integrated ventilation
systems is not a permissible method of providing the dwelling unit ventilation airflow required in
C Single family detached dwelling units, and attached dwelling units not sharing ceilings or floors with
other dwelling units, occupiable spaces, public garages, or commercial spaces shall have mechanical
ventilation airflow provided at rates determined in accordance with ASHRAE 62.2 Sections 4.1.1 and
4.1.2as specified in subsections i, ii, and iii below.
i. Total Required Ventilation Rate [ASHRAE 62.2:4.1.1].
The total required ventilation rate shall be calculated using Equation 150.0-B
Qtot = total required ventilation rate, cfm
Nbr = number of bedrooms (not to be less than 1)
ii. Effective Annual Average Infiltration Rate. The effective annual average infiltration rate shall
be determined in accordance with subsections a and b:
a. An enclosure leakage rate in cubic feet per minute at 50 Pa (0.2 inch water) (Q ) shall be
determined by either subsection 1, or subsection 2 below.
1. Q shall be calculated based on the conditioned volume of the dwelling unit and a default
value for dwelling unit envelope leakage of 2 air changes per hour at 50 PA (0.2 inch
ACH = air changes per hour at 50 Pa (0.2 inch water)
2. If dwelling unit envelope leakage less than 2 ACH is confirmed by field verification and
diagnostic testing, Q shall be calculated according to Equation 150.0-D below, using the
value for dwelling unit envelope leakage less than 2 ACH verified by the procedures
specified in Reference Residential Appendix RA3.8.
SECTION 150.0 – MANDATORY FEATURES AND DEVICES
2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards Page 273
ACH = air changes per hour at 50 Pa (0.2 inch water)
b. The Effective Annual Average Infiltration Rate (Q ) shall be calculated using Equation
Q = effective annual infiltration rate, cfm (L/s)
wsf = weather and shielding factor from Table 150.0-D
H = vertical distance between the lowest and highest above-grade points within the pressure
z = 0.4 for the purpose of calculating the Effective Annual Average Infiltration Rate
iii. Required Mechanical Ventilation Rate [ASHRAE 62.2:4.1.2].
The Required Mechanical Ventilation Rate (Q ) shall be calculated using Equation 150.0-F
Q = required mechanical ventilation rate, cfm (L/s)
Q = total required ventilation rate, cfm (L/s) from Equation 150.0-B
Q = effective annual average infiltration rate, cfm (L/s) from Equation 150.0-E
A = 1 for single-family detached homes, or the ratio of exterior envelope surface area that is not
attached to garages or other dwelling units to total envelope surface area for attached dwelling
units not sharing ceilings or floors with other dwelling units, occupiable spaces, public
Φ=1 for balanced ventilation systems and Q /Q otherwise
D. Air filtration shall conform to the specifications in Section 150.0(m)12. Compliance with ASHRAE
62.2 Sections 6.7 (Minimum Filtration) and 6.7.1 (Filter Pressure Drop) shall not be required.
E. Multifamily attached dwelling units shall have mechanical ventilation airflow provided at rates in
accordance with Equation 150.0-B [ASHRAE 62.2:4.1.1], and comply with one of the following
subsections i or ii below. When subsection ii below is utilized for compliance, all dwelling units in the
multifamily building shall use the same ventilation system type.
i. A balanced ventilation system shall provide the required dwelling-unit ventilation airflow, or
ii. Continuously operating supply ventilation systems, or continuously operating exhaust ventilation
systems shall be allowed to be used to provide the required dwelling unit ventilation airflow if the
dwelling-unit envelope leakage is less than or equal to 0.3 cubic feet per minute at 50 Pa (0.2 inch
water) per ft2 of dwelling unit envelope surface area as confirmed by field verification and
diagnostic testing in accordance with the procedures specified in Reference Residential Appendix
F. Multifamily building central ventilation systems that serve multiple dwelling units shall be balanced to
provide ventilation airflow for each dwelling unit served at a rate equal to or greater than the rate
specified by Equation 150.0-B [ASHRAE 62.2:4.1.1], but no more than twenty percent greater than the
specified rate. These systems shall utilize balancing means to ensure the dwelling-unit airflows can be
SECTION 150.0 – MANDATORY FEATURES AND DEVICES
Page 274 2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards
adjusted to meet this balancing requirement. These system balancing means may include but not be
limited to constant air regulation devices, orifice plates, and variable speed central fans.
G. Kitchen range hoods shall be rated for sound in accordance with Section 7.2 of ASHRAE 62.2.
EXCEPTION to Section 150.0(o)1G: Kitchen range hoods may be rated for sound at a static pressure
determined at working speed as specified in HVI 916 section 7.2.
H. Compliance with ASHRAE 62.2 Section 6.5.2 (Space Conditioning System Ducts) shall not be
I. Compliance with ASHRAE 62.2 Section 4.4 (Control and Operation) shall require manual switches
associated with dwelling unit ventilation systems to have a label clearly displaying the following text,
or equivalent text: "This switch controls the indoor air quality ventilation for the home. Leave it on
unless the outdoor air quality is very poor."
2. Field Verification and Diagnostic Testing.
A. Airflow Performance. The dwelling unit ventilation airflow required by Sections 150.0(o)1C,
150.0(o)1E, and 150.0(o)1F shall be confirmed through field verification and diagnostic testing in
accordance with the applicable procedures specified in Reference Residential Appendix RA3.7.
B Kitchen Range Hoods. The installed kitchen range hood shall be field verified in accordance with the
procedures in Reference Residential Appendix RA3.7.4.3 to confirm the model is rated by HVI to
comply with the following requirements:
i. The minimum ventilation airflow rate as specified in Section 5 of ASHRAE 62.2.
ii The maximum sound rating as specified in Section 150.0(o)1G.
(p) Pool Systems and Equipment Installation. Any residential pool system or equipment installed shall comply
with the applicable requirements of Section 110.4, as well as the requirements listed in this section.
1. Pump sizing and flow rate.
A. All pumps and pump motors installed shall be listed in the Commission’s directory of certified
equipment and shall comply with the Appliance Efficiency Regulations.
B. All pump flow rates shall be calculated using the following system equation:
H is the total system head in feet of water.
F is the flow rate in gallons per minute (gpm).
C is a coefficient based on the volume of the pool:
C. Filtration pumps shall be sized, or if programmable, shall be programmed, so that the filtration flow
rate is not greater than the rate needed to turn over the pool water volume in 6 hours or 36 gpm,
D. Pump motors used for filtration with a capacity of 1 hp or more shall be multispeed; and
E. Each auxiliary pool load shall be served by either separate pumps or the system shall be served by a
EXCEPTION to Section 150.0(p)1E: Pumps less than 1 hp may be single speed.
F. Multispeed pumps shall have controls which default to the filtration flow rate when no auxiliary pool
G. For multispeed pumps, the controls shall default to the filtration flow rate setting within 24 hours and
shall have an override capability for servicing.
SECTION 150.0 – MANDATORY FEATURES AND DEVICES
2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards Page 275
A. A length of straight pipe that is greater than or equal to at least 4 pipe diameters shall be installed
B. Pool piping shall be sized so that the velocity of the water at maximum flow for auxiliary pool loads
does not exceed 8 feet per second in the return line and 6 feet per second in the suction line; and
C. All elbows shall be sweep elbows or of an elbow-type that has a pressure drop of less than the pressure
drop of straight pipe with a length of 30 pipe diameters.
3. Filters. Filters shall be at least the size specified in NSF/ANSI 50 for public pool intended applications.
4. Valves. Minimum diameter of backwash valves shall be 2 inches or the diameter of the return pipe,
(q) Fenestration Products. Fenestration separating conditioned space from unconditioned space or outdoors shall
meet the requirements of either Item 1 or 2 below:
1. Fenestration, including skylight products, must have a maximum U-factor of 0.58.
EXCEPTION 1 to Section 150.0(q)1: Up to 10 square feet of fenestration area or 0.5 percent of the
Conditioned Floor Area, whichever is greater, is exempt from the maximum U-factor requirement.
EXCEPTION 2 to Section 150.0(q)1: For dual-glazed greenhouse or garden windows, up to 30 square feet
of fenestration area is exempt from the maximum U-factor requirement.
2. The weighted average U-factor of all fenestration, including skylight products, shall not exceed 0.58.
(r) Solar Ready Buildings. Shall meet the requirements of Section 110.10 applicable to the building project.
SECTION 150.0 – MANDATORY FEATURES AND DEVICES
Page 276 2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards
TABLE 150.0-A CLASSIFICATION OF HIGH EFFICACY LIGHT SOURCES
High Efficacy Light Sources
Light sources shall comply with one of the columns below:
Light sources in this column other than those Light sources in this column are only considered to be
installed in ceiling recessed downlight high efficacy if they are certified to the Commission as
luminaires are classified as high efficacy and High Efficacy Light Sources in accordance with Reference
are not required to comply with Reference Joint Appendix JA8 and marked as required by JA8.
1.Pin-based linear fluorescent or compact 8.All light sources installed in ceiling recessed downlight
fluorescent light sources using electronic luminaires. Note that ceiling recessed downlight
ballasts. luminaires shall not have screw bases regardless of
lamp type as described in Section 150.0(k)1C.
9.Any light source not otherwise listed in this table.
4.Luminaires with hardwired high frequency
colored light sources that are installed to
SECTION 150.0 – MANDATORY FEATURES AND DEVICES
2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards Page 277
TABLE 150.0-B: Return Duct Sizing for Single Return Duct Systems
Return duct length shall not exceed 30 feet and shall contain no more than 180° of bend. If the total bending exceeds
90°, one bend shall be a metal elbow.
Return grille devices shall be labeled in accordance with the requirements in Section 150.0(m)12Biv to disclose the
grille's design airflow rate and a maximum allowable clean-filter pressure drop of 25 Pa (0.1 inches water) for the air
filter when tested using ASHRAE Standard 52.2, or as rated in accordance with AHRI Standard 680 for the design
airflow rate for the return grille.
Minimum Total Return Filter
System Nominal Cooling Return Duct Minimum
*Not applicable to systems with nominal cooling capacity greater than 2.5 tons or less than 1.5 ton
TABLE 150.0-C: Return Duct Sizing for Multiple Return Duct Systems
Each return duct length shall not exceed 30 feet and shall contain no more than 180° of bend. If the total bending exceeds 90°, one bend
Return grille devices shall be labeled in accordance with the requirements in Section 150.0(m)12Biv to disclose the grille's design
airflow rate and a maximum allowable clean-filter pressure drop of 25 Pa (0.1 inches water) for the air filter when tested using
ASHRAE Standard 52.2, or as rated in accordance with AHRI Standard 680 for the design airflow rate for the return grille.
System Nominal Return Duct 1 Return Duct 2 Minimum Total Return Filter
Cooling Capacity Minimum Nominal Minimum Nominal Grille Nominal Area
*Not applicable to systems with nominal cooling capacity greater than 5.0 tons or less than 1.5 tons.
SECTION 150.0 – MANDATORY FEATURES AND DEVICES
Page 278 2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards
TABLE 150.0-D: Infiltration Effectiveness Weather and Shielding Factors [ASHRAE 62.2:Table B1]
TMY3 wsf Weather Station Latitude Longitude State
SECTION 150.0 – MANDATORY FEATURES AND DEVICES
2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards Page 279
TABLE 150.0-D: Infiltration Effectiveness Weather and Shielding Factors [ASHRAE 62.2:Table B1] (continued)
TMY3 wsf Weather Station Latitude Longitude State
SECTION 150.0 – MANDATORY FEATURES AND DEVICES
Page 280 2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards
SECTION 150.0 – MANDATORY FEATURES AND DEVICES
2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards Page 281
PERFORMANCE AND PRESCRIPTIVE COMPLIANCE
SECTION 150.1 – PERFORMANCE AND PRESCRIPTIVE COMPLIANCE
APPROACHES FOR LOW-RISE RESIDENTIAL BUILDINGS
(a) Basic Requirements. Low-rise residential buildings shall meet all of the following:
1. The applicable requirements of Sections 110.0 through 110.10.
2. The applicable requirements of Section 150.0 (mandatory features).
3. Either the performance standards or the prescriptive standards set forth in this section for the Climate Zone
in which the building is located. Climate zones are shown in Reference Joint Appendix JA2 –
EXCEPTION to Section 150.1(a)3: If a single contiguous subdivision or tract falls in more than one
Climate Zone, all buildings in the subdivision or tract may be designed to meet the performance or
prescriptive standards for the Climate Zone that contains 50 percent or more of the dwelling units.
NOTE: The Commission periodically updates, publishes, and makes available to interested persons and
local enforcement agencies precise descriptions of the Climate Zones, as specified in Reference Joint
NOTE: The requirements of Sections 150.0(a) through 150.0(r) apply to newly constructed buildings and
Sections 150.2(a) and 150.2(b) specifies changes to the requirements of Sections 150.1(a) through 150.1(c) that
(b) Performance Standards. A building complies with the performance standards if the energy consumption
calculated for the Proposed Design Building is no greater than the energy budget calculated for the Standard
Design Building using Commission-certified compliance software as specified by the Alternative Calculation
1. Newly Constructed Buildings. The Energy Budget for newly constructed buildings is expressed in terms
of the Energy Design Rating, which is based on time-dependent valuation (TDV) energy. The Energy
Design Rating (EDR) has two components, the Energy Efficiency Design Rating, and the Solar Electric
Generation and Demand Flexibility Design Rating. The Solar Electric Generation and Demand Flexibility
Design Rating shall be subtracted from the Energy Efficiency Design Rating to determine the Total Energy
Design Rating. The Proposed Building shall separately comply with the Energy Efficiency Design Rating
and the Total Energy Design Rating.
EXCEPTION to Section 150.1(b)1. A community shared solar electric generation system, or other
renewable electric generation system, and/or community shared battery storage system, which provides
dedicated power, utility energy reduction credits, or payments for energy bill reductions, to the permitted
building and is approved by the Energy Commission as specified in Title 24, Part 1, Section 10-115, may
offset part or all of the solar electric generation system Energy Design Rating required to comply with the
Standards, as calculated according to methods established by the Commission in the Residential ACM
2. Additions and Alterations to Existing Buildings. The Energy Budget for additions and alterations is
SECTION 150.1 – PERFORMANCE AND PRESCRIPTIVE COMPLIANCE APPROACHES FOR LOW-RISE
Page 282 2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards
3. Compliance Demonstration Requirements for Performance Standards.
A. Certificate of Compliance and Application for a Building Permit. The application for a building
permit shall include documentation pursuant to Sections 10-103(a)1 and 10-103(a)2 which
demonstrates, using an approved calculation method, that the building has been designed so that its
Energy Efficiency Design Rating and the total EDR meets or exceeds the Standard design EDR for the
EXCEPTION to Section 150.1(b)3A: Multiple Orientation: A permit applicant may demonstrate
compliance with the energy budget requirements of Section 150.1(a) and (b) for any orientation of the
same building model if the documentation demonstrates that the building model with its proposed
designs and features would comply in each of the four cardinal orientations.
B. Field Verification. When performance of installed features, materials, components, manufactured
devices or systems above the minimum specified in Section 150.1(c) is necessary for the building to
comply with Section 150.1(b), or is necessary to achieve a more stringent local ordinance, field
verification shall be performed in accordance with the applicable requirements in the following
subsections, and the results of the verification(s) shall be documented on applicable Certificates of
Installation pursuant to Section 10-103(a)3 and applicable Certificates of Verification pursuant to
i. SEER Rating. When performance compliance requires installation of a space conditioning system
with a SEER rating that is greater than the minimum SEER rating required by TABLE 150.1-A or
B, the installed system shall be field verified in accordance with the procedures specified in
ii. EER Rating. When performance compliance requires installation of a space conditioning system
with an EER rating greater than the standard design value for EER, the installed system shall be
field verified in accordance with the procedures specified in Reference Residential Appendix
iii. Low Leakage Air Handler. When performance compliance requires installation of a low leakage
air-handling unit, the installed air-handling unit shall be field verified in accordance with the
procedures specified in Reference Residential Appendix RA3.1.4.3.9.
iv. HSPF Rating. When performance compliance requires installation of a heat pump system with a
Heating Seasonal Performance Factor (HSPF) rating that is greater than the minimum HSPF rating
required by TABLE 150.1-A or B, the installed system shall be field verified in accordance with
the procedures specified in Reference Residential Appendix RA3.4.4.1.
v. Heat Pump - Rated Heating Capacity. When performance compliance requires installation of a
heat pump system, the heating capacity values at 47° F and 17° F shall be field verified in
accordance with the procedures specified in Reference Residential Appendix RA3.4.4.2.
vi. Whole-house fan. When performance compliance requires installation of a whole-house fan, the
whole-house fan ventilation airflow rate and fan efficacy shall be field verified in accordance with
the procedures in Reference Residential Appendix RA3.9.
vii. Central Fan Ventilation Cooling System. When performance compliance requires installation of
a central fan ventilation cooling system, the installed system shall be field verified in accordance
with the procedures in Reference Residential Appendix RA3.3.4.
viii. Building Enclosure Air Leakage. When performance compliance requires a building enclosure
leakage rate that is lower than the standard design, the building enclosure shall be field verified in
accordance with the procedures specified in Reference Residential Appendix RA3.8.
ix. Quality Insulation Installation (QII). When performance compliance requires field verification
of QII, the building insulation system shall be field verified in accordance with the procedures in
(c) Prescriptive Standards/Component Packages. Buildings that comply with the prescriptive standards shall be
designed, constructed, and equipped to meet all of the requirements for the appropriate Climate Zone shown in
TABLE 150.1-A or B. In TABLE 150.1-A and TABLE 150.1-B, NA (not allowed) means that feature is not
SECTION 150.1 – PERFORMANCE AND PRESCRIPTIVE COMPLIANCE APPROACHES FOR LOW-RISE
2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards Page 283
permitted in a particular Climate Zone and NR (no requirement) means that there is no prescriptive requirement
for that feature in a particular Climate Zone. Installed components shall meet the following requirements:
A. Roof and Ceiling insulation shall be installed in a ventilated attic with an R-value equal to or greater
than that shown in TABLE 150.1-A or B meeting options ii or iii below.
ii. Option B: A minimum R-value of insulation installed between the roof rafters in contact with the
roof deck and an additional layer of ceiling insulation located between the attic and the conditioned
space when meeting Section 150.1(c)9A; or
iii. Option C: A minimum R-value of ceiling insulation located between the attic and the conditioned
space when meeting Section 150.1(c)9B.
NOTE: Low rise residential single family and multifamily buildings with the ducts and air handler
located in the conditioned space, as specified by Section 150.1(c)9B, need only comply with insulation
i. Framed exterior walls shall be insulated such that the exterior wall has an assembly U-factor equal
to or less than that shown in TABLE 150.1-A or B. The U-factors shown are maximum U-factors
for the exterior wall assembly.
ii. Mass walls above grade and below grade shall be insulated such that the wall has an assembly U-
factor equal to or less than that shown in TABLE 150.1-A or B, or walls shall be insulated with
continuous insulation that has an R-value equal to or greater than that shown in TABLE 150.1-A or
B.“Interior” denotes continuous insulation installed on the inside surface of the wall, and
“exterior” denotes continuous insulation installed on the outside surface of the wall.
iii. Other unframed exterior walls, excluding mass walls, shall meet the requirements for framed walls
C. Raised-floors shall be insulated such that the floor assembly has an assembly U-factor equal to or less
than shown in TABLE 150.1-A or B, or shall be insulated between wood framing with insulation
having an R-value equal to or greater than that shown in TABLE 150.1-A or B.
EXCEPTION to Section 150.1(c)1C: Raised-floor insulation may be omitted if the foundation walls
are insulated to meet the wall insulation minimums shown in TABLE 150.1-A or B, and a vapor
retarder is placed over the entire floor of the crawl space, and the vents are fitted with automatically
operated louvers, and the requirements of Reference Residential Appendix RA4.5.1 are met.
D. Slab floor perimeter insulation shall be installed with a U-factor equal to or less than or R-value equal
to or greater than shown in TABLE 150.1-A or B. The minimum depth of concrete-slab floor perimeter
insulation shall be 16 inches or the depth of the footing of the building, whichever is less.
EXCEPTION to Section 150.1(c)1: The insulation requirements of TABLEs 150.1-A and 150.1-B
may also be met by ceiling, roof deck, wall, or floor assemblies that meet the required maximum U-
factors using a U-factor calculation method that considers the thermal effects of all elements of the
assembly and is approved by the Executive Director.
E. All buildings shall comply with the Quality Insulation Installation (QII) requirements shown in TABLE
150.1-A or B. When QII is required, insulation installation shall meet the criteria specified in Reference
2. Radiant Barrier. A radiant barrier required in TABLE 150.1-A or B shall meet the requirements specified
in Section 110.8(j), and shall meet the installation criteria specified in the Reference Residential Appendix
SECTION 150.1 – PERFORMANCE AND PRESCRIPTIVE COMPLIANCE APPROACHES FOR LOW-RISE
Page 284 2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards
A. Installed fenestration products, including glazed doors, shall have an area weighted average U-factor
and Solar Heat Gain Coefficient (SHGC) meeting the applicable fenestration value in TABLE 150.1-A
or B and shall be determined in accordance with Sections 110.6(a)2 and 110.6(a)3.
EXCEPTION 1 to Section 150.1(c)3A: For each dwelling unit up to 3 square feet of new glazing area
installed in doors and up to 3 square feet of new tubular skylights area with dual-pane diffusers shall
not be required to meet the U-factor and SHGC requirements of TABLE 150.1-A or B.
EXCEPTION 2 to Section 150.1(c)3A: For each dwelling unit up to 16 square feet of new skylight
area with a maximum U-factor of 0.55 and a maximum SHGC of 0.30.
EXCEPTION 3 to Section 150.1(c)3A For fenestration containing chromogenic type glazing:
i. The lower-rated labeled U-factor and SHGC shall be used with automatic controls to modulate the
amount of solar gain and light transmitted into the space in multiple steps in response to daylight
ii. Chromogenic glazing shall be considered separately from other fenestration; and
iii. Area-weighted averaging with other fenestration that is not chromatic shall not be permitted and
shall be determined in accordance with Section 110.6(a).
EXCEPTION 4 to Section 150.1(c)3A: For dwelling units containing unrated site-built fenestration
that meets the maximum area restriction, the U-factor and SHGC can be determined in accordance with
the Nonresidential Reference Appendix NA6 or use default values in TABLE 110.6-A and TABLE
B. The maximum total fenestration area shall not exceed the percentage of conditioned floor area, CFA, as
indicated in TABLE 150.1-A or B. Total fenestration includes skylights and west-facing glazing.
C. The maximum west-facing fenestration area shall not exceed the percentage of conditioned floor area
as indicated in TABLE 150.1-A or B. West-facing fenestration area includes skylights tilted in any
direction when the pitch is less than 1:12.
4. Shading. Where TABLE 150.1-A or B requires a Maximum SHGC, the requirements shall be met by one
A. Complying with the required SHGC pursuant to Section 150.1(c)3A; or
B. An exterior operable shading louver or other exterior shading device that meets the required SHGC; or
C. A combination of Items A and B to achieve the same performance as achieved in Section 150.1(c)3A.
D. For south-facing glazing only, optimal overhangs shall be installed so that the south-facing glazing is
fully shaded at solar noon on August 21 and substantially exposed to direct sunlight at solar noon on
E. Exterior shading devices must be permanently secured with attachments or fasteners that are not
EXCEPTION to Section 150.1(c)4E: Where the California Building Code (CBC) requires emergency
egress or where compliance would conflict with Health and Safety regulations.
5. Doors. Installed swinging door products separating conditioned space from outside or adjacent
unconditioned space, but not including glazed door products, shall have an area-weighted average U-factor
no greater than the applicable door value in TABLE 150.1-A or B and shall be determined in accordance
with Section 110.6(a)2. Glazed door products are treated as fenestration products in Sections 150.1(c)3 and
EXCEPTION to Section 150.1(c)5: Swinging doors between the garage and conditioned space that are
required to have fire protection are not required to meet the applicable door value in TABLE 150.1-A or B.
6. Heating System Type. Heating system types shall be installed as required in TABLE 150.1-A or B.
SECTION 150.1 – PERFORMANCE AND PRESCRIPTIVE COMPLIANCE APPROACHES FOR LOW-RISE
2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards Page 285
EXCEPTION to Section 150.1(c)6: A supplemental heating unit may be installed in a space served
directly or indirectly by a primary heating system, provided that the unit thermal capacity does not exceed 2
kW or 7,000 Btu/hr and is controlled by a time-limiting device not exceeding 30 minutes.
7. Space Heating and Space Cooling. All space heating and space cooling equipment shall comply with
minimum Appliance Efficiency Regulations as specified in Sections 110.0 through 110.2 and meet all
applicable requirements of Sections 150.0 and 150.1(c)7A.
A. Refrigerant Charge. When refrigerant charge verification or fault indicator display is shown as
required by TABLE 150.1-A or B, the system shall comply with either Section 150.1(c)7Ai or
i. air-cooled air conditioners and air-source heat pumps, including but not limited to ducted split
systems, ducted packaged systems, small duct high velocity systems, and mini-split systems, shall
comply with subsections a, b and c, unless the system is of a type that cannot be verified using the
a. Have measurement access holes (MAH) installed according to the specifications in Reference
Residential Appendix Section RA3.2.2.3; and
EXCEPTION to Section 150.1(c)7Aia: Systems that cannot conform to the specifications for
hole location in Reference Residential Appendix Figure RA3.2-1, shall not be required to
provide holes as described in Figure RA3.2-1.
b. System airflow rate in accordance with subsection I or II shall be confirmed through field
verification and diagnostic testing in accordance with all applicable procedures specified in
Reference Residential Appendix Section RA3. 3 or an approved alternative procedure as
I. For small duct high velocity systems the system airflow rate shall be greater than or equal
II. For all other air-cooled air conditioner or air-source heat pump systems the system airflow
rate shall be greater than or equal to 350 cfm per ton.
EXCEPTION to Section 150.1(c)7Aib: Standard ducted systems without zoning dampers
may comply with the minimum airflow rate by meeting the applicable requirements in
TABLE-150.0-B or 150.0-C as confirmed by field verification and diagnostic testing in
accordance with the procedures in Reference Residential Appendix Section RA3.1.4.4 and
RA3.1.4.5. The design clean-filter pressure drop requirements of Section 150.0(m)12D for the
system air filter device(s) shall conform to the requirements given in TABLES 150.0-B and
c. The installer shall charge the system according to manufacturer’s specifications. Refrigerant
charge shall be verified according to one of the following options, as applicable:
I. The installer and rater shall perform the standard charge procedure as specified by
Reference Residential Appendix Section RA3.2.2 or an approved alternative procedure as
II. The system shall be equipped with a fault indicator display (FID) device that meets the
specifications of Reference Joint Appendix JA6. The installer shall verify the refrigerant
charge and FID device in accordance with the procedures in Reference Residential
Appendix Section RA3.4.2. The HERS Rater shall verify FID device in accordance with
III. The installer shall perform the weigh-in charging procedure as specified by Reference
Residential Appendix Section RA3.2.3.1 provided the system is of a type that can be
verified using the Section RA3.2.2 standard charge verification procedure and Section
RA3.3 airflow rate verification procedure or approved alternatives in Section RA1. The
HERS Rater shall verify the charge using Sections RA3.2.2 and RA3.3 or approved
SECTION 150.1 – PERFORMANCE AND PRESCRIPTIVE COMPLIANCE APPROACHES FOR LOW-RISE
Page 286 2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards
EXCEPTION 1 to Section 150.1(c)7Aic: When the outdoor temperature is less than 55° F
and the installer utilizes the weigh-in charging procedure in Reference Residential Appendix
Section RA3.2.3.1 to verify the refrigerant charge, the installer may elect to utilize the HERS
Rater verification procedure in Reference Residential Appendix Section RA3.2.3.2. If the
HERS Rater verification procedure in Section RA3.2.3.2 is used for compliance, the system's
thermostat shall conform to the specifications in Section 110.12. Ducted systems shall comply
with minimum system airflow rate requirement in Section 150.1(c)7Aib.
ii. Air-cooled air conditioners and air-source heat pumps, including but not limited to ducted split
systems, ducted packaged systems, small duct high velocity systems and mini-split systems, which
are of a type that cannot comply with the requirements of Section 150.1(c)7Ai shall comply with
a. The installer shall confirm the refrigerant charge using the weigh-in charging procedure
specified in Reference Residential Appendix Section RA3.2.3.1, as verified by a HERS Rater
according to the procedures specified in Reference Residential Appendix Section RA3.2.3.2;
b. Systems that utilize forced air ducts shall comply with the minimum system airflow rate
requirement in Section 150.1(c)7Aib provided the system is of a type that can be verified
using the procedures in Section RA3.3 or an approved alternative procedure in Section RA1.
EXCEPTION to Section 150.1(c)7A: Packaged systems for which the manufacturer has verified correct
system refrigerant charge prior to shipment from the factory are not required to have refrigerant charge
confirmed through field verification and diagnostic testing. The installer of these packaged systems shall
certify on the Certificate of Installation that the packaged system was pre-charged at the factory and has not
been altered in a way that would affect the charge. Ducted systems shall comply with minimum system
airflow rate requirements in Section 150.1(c)7Aib, provided that the system is of a type that can be verified
using the procedure specified in Section RA3.3 or an approved alternative in Section RA1.
8. Domestic Water-Heating Systems. Water-heating systems shall meet the requirements of A, B or C. For
recirculation distribution systems serving individual dwelling unit, only Demand Recirculation Systems
with manual on/off control as specified in the Reference Appendix RA4.4.9 shall be used:
A. For systems serving individual dwelling units, the water heating system shall meet the requirement of i,
i. One or more gas or propane instantaneous water heater with an input of 200,000 Btu per hour or
ii. A single gas or propane storage type water heater with an input of 75,000 Btu per hour or less,
rated volume less than or equal to 55 gallons and that meets the requirements of Sections 110.1 and
110.3. The dwelling unit shall have installed fenestration products with a weighted average U-
factor no greater than 0.24, and in addition one of the following shall be installed:
a. A compact hot water distribution system that is field verified as specified in the Reference
b. A drain water heat recovery system that is field verified as specified in the Reference
iii. A single gas or propane storage type water heater with an input of 75,000 Btu per hour or less,
rated volume of more than 55 gallons.
iv. A single heat pump water heater. The storage tank shall be located in the garage or conditioned
a. A compact hot water distribution system as specified in the Reference Appendix RA4.4.6 and
a drain water heat recovery system that is field verified as specified in the Reference Appendix
b. For Climate Zones 2 through 15, a photovoltaic system capacity of 0.3 kWdc larger than the
SECTION 150.1 – PERFORMANCE AND PRESCRIPTIVE COMPLIANCE APPROACHES FOR LOW-RISE
2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards Page 287
c. For Climate Zones 1 and 16, a photovoltaic system capacity of 1.1 kWdc larger than the
v. A single heat pump water heater that meets the requirements of NEEA Advanced Water Heater
Specification Tier 3 or higher. The storage tank shall be located in the garage or conditioned
space. In addition, for Climate Zones 1 and 16, a photovoltaic system capacity of 0.3 kWdc larger
than the requirement specified in Section 150.1(c)14 or a compact hot water distribution system as
specified in the Reference Appendix RA4.4.6.
B. For systems serving multiple dwelling units, a central water-heating system that includes the following
i. Gas or propane water heating system.
ii. A recirculation system that meets the requirements of Sections 110.3(c)2 and 110.3(c)5, includes
two or more separate recirculation loops serving separate dwelling units, and is capable of
automatically controlling the recirculation pump operation based on measurement of hot water
demand and hot water return temperature.
EXCEPTION to Section 150.1(c)8Bii: Buildings with eight or fewer dwelling units may use a
iii. A solar water-heating system meeting the installation criteria specified in Reference Residential
Appendix RA4 and with a minimum solar savings fraction of either a or b:
a. A minimum solar savings fraction of 0.20 in Climate Zones 1 through 9 or a minimum solar
savings fraction of 0.35 in Climate Zones 10 through 16.
b. A minimum solar savings fraction of 0.15 in Climate Zones 1 through 9 or a minimum solar
savings fraction of 0.30 in Climate Zones 10 through 16. In addition, a drain water heat
recovery system that is field verified as specified in the Reference Appendix RA3.6.9.
C. A water-heating system serving multiple dwelling units determined by the Executive Director to use no
more energy than the one specified in subsection B.
9. Space Conditioning Distribution Systems. All space conditioning systems shall meet all applicable
A. High performance attics. Air handlers or ducts are allowed to be in ventilated attic spaces when the roof
and ceiling insulation level meet Option B in TABLE 150.1-A or B. Duct insulation levels shall meet
B. Duct and air handlers located in conditioned space. Duct systems and air handlers of HVAC systems
shall be located in conditioned space, and confirmed by field verification and diagnostic testing to meet
the criterion of Reference Residential Appendix Section RA3.1.4.3.8. Duct insulation levels shall meet
NOTE: Gas heating appliances installed in conditioned spaces must meet the combustion air requirements
of the California Mechanical Code Chapter 7, as applicable.
10. Central Fan Integrated Ventilation Systems. Central forced air system fans used to provide outside air,
shall have an air-handling unit fan efficacy less than or equal to the maximum W/CFM specified in A or B.
The airflow rate and fan efficacy requirements in this section shall be confirmed through field verification
and diagnostic testing in accordance with all applicable procedures specified in Reference Residential
Appendix RA3.3. Central Fan Integrated Ventilation Systems shall be certified to the Energy Commission
as Intermittent Ventilation Systems as specified in Reference Residential Appendix RA3.7.4.2.
A. 0.45 W/CFM for gas furnace air-handling units; or
B. 0.58 W/CFM for air-handling units that are not gas furnaces.
EXCEPTION to Section 151.0(c)10A: Gas furnace air-handling units manufactured prior to July 3, 2019
shall comply with a fan efficacy value less than or equal to 0.58 w/cfm as confirmed by field verification
and diagnostic testing in accordance with the procedures given in Reference Residential Appendix RA3.3.
SECTION 150.1 – PERFORMANCE AND PRESCRIPTIVE COMPLIANCE APPROACHES FOR LOW-RISE
Page 288 2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards
11. Roofing products. All roofing products shall meet the requirements of Section 110.8 and the applicable
A. Low-rise residential buildings with steep-sloped roofs, in Climate Zones 10 through 15 shall have a
minimum aged solar reflectance of 0.20 and a minimum thermal emittance of 0.75, or a minimum SRI
B. Low-rise residential buildings with low-sloped roofs; in Climate Zones 13 and 15 shall have a
minimum aged solar reflectance of 0.63 and a minimum thermal emittance of 0.75 or a minimum SRI
EXCEPTION 1 to Section 150.1(c)11: Building integrated photovoltaic panels and building
integrated solar thermal panels are exempt from the minimum requirements for solar reflectance and
EXCEPTION 2 to Section 150.1(c)11: Roof constructions with a weight of at least 25 lb/ft² are
exempt from the minimum requirements for solar reflectance and thermal emittance or SRI.
12. Ventilation Cooling. Single family homes shall comply with the Whole-house fan (WHF) requirements
shown in TABLE 150.1-A. When a WHF is required, comply with Subsections A. through C. below:
A. Have installed one or more WHFs whose total Airflow CFM is equal to or greater than 1.5 CFM/ft2 of
conditioned floor area. Airflow CFM for WHF's shall be determined based on the Airflow listed in the
Energy Commission's database of certified appliances, which is available at
B. Have at least 1 square foot of attic vent free area for each 750 CFM of rated whole-house fan Airflow
CFM, or if the manufacturer has specified a greater free vent area, the manufacturers’ free vent area
EXCEPTION to Section 150.1(c)12B: WHFs that are directly vented to the outside.
C. Provide homeowners who have WHFs with a one page “How to operate your whole-house fan”
13. HVAC System Bypass Ducts. Bypass ducts that deliver conditioned supply air directly to the space
conditioning system return duct airflow shall not be used.
14. Photovoltaic Requirements. All low-rise residential buildings shall have a photovoltaic (PV) system
meeting the minimum qualification requirements as specified in Joint Appendix JA11, with annual
electrical output equal to or greater than the dwelling’s annual electrical usage as determined by Equation
EQUATION 150.1-C ANNUAL PHOTOVOLTAIC ELECTRICAL OUTPUT
kW = kWdc size of the PV system
CFA = Conditioned floor area
NDwell = Number of dwelling units
A = Adjustment factor from Table 150.1-C
B = Dwelling adjustment factor from Table 150.1-C
EXCEPTION 1 to Section 150.1(c)14: No PV system is required if the effective annual solar access is
restricted to less than 80 contiguous square feet by shading from existing permanent natural or manmade
barriers external to the dwelling, including but not limited to trees, hills, and adjacent structures. The
SECTION 150.1 – PERFORMANCE AND PRESCRIPTIVE COMPLIANCE APPROACHES FOR LOW-RISE
2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards Page 289
effective annual solar access shall be 70 percent or greater of the output of an unshaded PV array on an
EXCEPTION 2 to Section 150.1(c)14: In climate zone 15, the PV system size shall be the smaller of a size
that can be accommodated by the effective annual solar access or a PV system size required by the Equation
150.1-C, but no less than 1.5 Watt DC per square foot of conditioned floor area.
EXCEPTION 3 to Section 150.1(c)14: In all climate zones, for dwelling units with two habitable stories,
the PV system size shall be the smaller of a size that can be accommodated by the effective annual solar
access or a PV system size required by the Equation 150.1-C, but no less than 1.0 Watt DC per square foot
EXCEPTION 4 to Section 150.1(c)14: In all climate zones, for low-rise residential dwellings with three
habitable stories and single family dwellings with three or more habitable stories, the PV system size shall
be the smaller of a size that can be accommodated by the effective annual solar access or the PV system size
required by the Equation 150.1-C, but no less than 0.8 Watt DC per square foot of conditioned floor area.
EXCEPTION 5 to Section 150.1(c)14: For a dwelling unit plan that is approved by the planning
department prior to January 1, 2020 with available solar ready zone between 80 and 200 square feet, the PV
system size is limited to the lesser of the size that can be accommodated by the effective annual solar access
or the size that is required by the Equation 150.1-C.
EXCEPTION 6 to Section 150.1(c)14: PV system sizes from Equation 150.1-C may be reduced by 25
percent if installed in conjunction with a battery storage system. The battery storage system shall meet the
qualification requirements specified in Joint Appendix JA12 and have a minimum capacity of 7.5 kWh.
SECTION 150.1 – PERFORMANCE AND PRESCRIPTIVE COMPLIANCE APPROACHES FOR LOW-RISE
Page 290 2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards
Table 150.1-C – CFA and Dwelling Adjustment Factors
SECTION 150.1 – PERFORMANCE AND PRESCRIPTIVE COMPLIANCE APPROACHES FOR LOW-RISE
2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards Page 291
TABLE 150.1-A COMPONENT PACKAGE – Single Family Standard Building Design
Radiant Barrier NR REQ REQ NR REQ REQ REQ NR NR NR NR NR NR NR NR NR
Radiant Barrier NR REQ REQ REQ REQ REQ REQ REQ REQ REQ REQ REQ REQ REQ REQ NR
SECTION 150.1 – PERFORMANCE AND PRESCRIPTIVE COMPLIANCE APPROACHES FOR LOW-RISE RESIDENTIAL BUILDINGS
Page 292 2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards
TABLE 150.1-A COMPONENT PACKAGE – Single Family Standard Building Design (continued)
Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
SECTION 150.1 – PERFORMANCE AND PRESCRIPTIVE COMPLIANCE APPROACHES FOR LOW-RISE RESIDENTIAL BUILDINGS
2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards Page 293
TABLE 150.1-A COMPONENT PACKAGE – Single Family Standard Building Design (continued)
If gas, AFUE MIN MIN MIN MIN MIN MIN MIN MIN MIN MIN MIN MIN MIN MIN MIN MIN
If Heat Pump, HSPF 7 MIN MIN MIN MIN MIN MIN MIN MIN MIN MIN MIN MIN MIN MIN MIN MIN
SEER MIN MIN MIN MIN MIN MIN MIN MIN MIN MIN MIN MIN MIN MIN MIN MIN
Verification or Fault NR REQ NR NR NR NR NR REQ REQ REQ REQ REQ REQ REQ REQ NR
Whole-house fan8 NR NR NR NR NR NR NR REQ REQ REQ REQ REQ REQ REQ NR NR
Ventilation System Fan REQ REQ REQ REQ REQ REQ REQ REQ REQ REQ REQ REQ REQ REQ REQ REQ
§150.1(c)9B REQ REQ REQ REQ REQ REQ REQ REQ REQ REQ REQ REQ REQ REQ REQ REQ
All Buildings System Shall meet Section 150.1(c)8
SECTION 150.1 – PERFORMANCE AND PRESCRIPTIVE COMPLIANCE APPROACHES FOR LOW-RISE RESIDENTIAL BUILDINGS
Page 294 2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards
1. Install the specified R-value with an air space present between the roofing and the roof deck. Such as standard installation of
2. R-values shown for below roof deck insulation are for wood-frame construction with insulation installed between the
framing members. Alternatives including insulation above rafters or above roof deck shall comply with the performance
3. Assembly U-factors for exterior framed walls can be met with cavity insulation alone or with continuous insulation alone, or
with both cavity and continuous insulation that results in an assembly U-factor equal to or less than the U-factor shown. Use
Reference Joint Appendices JA4 Table 4.3.1, 4.3.1(a), or Table 4.3.4 to determine alternative insulation products to be less
than or equal to the required maximum U-factor.
4. Mass wall has a heat capacity greater than or equal to 7.0 Btu/h-ft2. “
5. “Interior” denotes insulation installed on the inside surface of the wall. “Exterior” denotes insulation installed on the exterior
6. Below grade “interior” denotes insulation installed on the inside surface of the wall, and below grade “exterior” denotes
insulation installed on the outside surface of the wall.
7. HSPF means "heating seasonal performance factor."
8. When whole-house fans are required (REQ), only those whole-house fans that are listed in the Appliance Efficiency
Directory may be installed. Compliance requires installation of one or more WHFs whose total airflow CFM is capable of
meeting or exceeding a minimum 1.5 cfm/square foot of conditioned floor area as specified by Section 150.1(c)12.
9. A supplemental heating unit may be installed in a space served directly or indirectly by a primary heating system, provided
that the unit thermal capacity does not exceed 2 kilowatts or 7,000 Btu/hr and is controlled by a time-limiting device not
10. For duct and air handler location: REQ denotes location in conditioned space. When the table indicates ducts and air
handlers are in conditioned space, a HERS verification is required as specified by Reference Residential Appendix
SECTION 150.1 – PERFORMANCE AND PRESCRIPTIVE COMPLIANCE APPROACHES FOR LOW-RISE
2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards Page 295
TABLE 150.1-B COMPONENT PACKAGE – Multifamily Standard Building Design
Below Roof Deck Insulation 1,2
Radiant Barrier NR REQ REQ NR REQ REQ REQ NR NR NR NR NR NR NR NR NR
Radiant Barrier NR REQ REQ REQ REQ REQ REQ REQ REQ REQ REQ REQ REQ REQ REQ NR
SECTION 150.1 – PERFORMANCE AND PRESCRIPTIVE COMPLIANCE APPROACHES FOR LOW-RISE RESIDENTIAL BUILDINGS
Page 296 2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards
TABLE 150.1-B COMPONENT PACKAGE – Multifamily Standard Building Design (continued)
Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes NR Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
SECTION 150.1 – PERFORMANCE AND PRESCRIPTIVE COMPLIANCE APPROACHES FOR LOW-RISE RESIDENTIAL BUILDINGS
2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards Page 297
TABLE 150.1-B COMPONENT PACKAGE – Multifamily Standard Building Design (continued)
If gas, AFUE MIN MIN MIN MIN MIN MIN MIN MIN MIN MIN MIN MIN MIN MIN MIN MIN
If Heat Pump, HSPF 7 MIN MIN MIN MIN MIN MIN MIN MIN MIN MIN MIN MIN MIN MIN MIN MIN
SEER MIN MIN MIN MIN MIN MIN MIN MIN MIN MIN MIN MIN MIN MIN MIN MIN
Verification or Fault NR REQ NR NR NR NR NR REQ REQ REQ REQ REQ REQ REQ REQ NR
Ventilation System Fan REQ REQ REQ REQ REQ REQ REQ REQ REQ REQ REQ REQ REQ REQ REQ REQ
§150.1(c)9B REQ REQ REQ REQ REQ REQ REQ REQ REQ REQ REQ REQ REQ REQ REQ REQ
All Buildings System Shall meet Section 150.1(c)8
SECTION 150.1 – PERFORMANCE AND PRESCRIPTIVE COMPLIANCE APPROACHES FOR LOW-RISE RESIDENTIAL BUILDINGS
2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards Page 299
1. Install the specified R-value with an air space present between the roofing and the roof deck. Such as standard
2. R-values shown for below roof deck insulation are for wood-frame construction with insulation installed between the
framing members. Alternatives including insulation above rafters or above roof deck shall comply with the
3. Assembly U-factors for exterior framed walls can be met with cavity insulation alone or with continuous insulation
alone, or with both cavity and continuous insulation that results in an assembly U-factor equal to or less than the U-
factor shown. Use Reference Joint Appendices JA4 Table 4.3.1, 4.3.1(a), or Table 4.3.4 to determine alternative
insulation products to be less than or equal to the required maximum U-factor.
4. Mass wall has a heat capacity greater than or equal to 7.0 Btu/h-ft2.
5. “Interior” denotes insulation installed on the inside surface of the wall. “Exterior” denotes insulation installed on the
6. Below grade “interior” denotes insulation installed on the inside surface of the wall, and below grade “exterior”
denotes insulation installed on the outside surface of the wall.
7. HSPF means "heating seasonal performance factor."
8. A supplemental heating unit may be installed in a space served directly or indirectly by a primary heating system,
provided that the unit thermal capacity does not exceed 2 kilowatts or 7,000 Btu/hr and is controlled by a time-
limiting device not exceeding 30 minutes.
9. For duct and air handler location: REQ denotes location in conditioned space. When the table indicates ducts
and air handlers are in conditioned space, a HERS verification is required as specified by Reference Residential
SECTION 150.1 – PERFORMANCE AND PRESCRIPTIVE COMPLIANCE APPROACHES FOR LOW-RISE
Page 300 2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards
SECTION 150.1 – PERFORMANCE AND PRESCRIPTIVE COMPLIANCE APPROACHES FOR LOW-RISE
2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards Page 301
LOW-RISE RESIDENTIAL BUILDINGS - ADDITIONS
AND ALTERATIONS TO EXISTING LOW-RISE
SECTION 150.2 – ENERGY EFFICIENCY STANDARDS FOR ADDITIONS
AND ALTERATIONS TO EXISTING LOW-RISE RESIDENTIAL
(a) Additions. Additions to existing low-rise residential buildings shall meet the requirements of Sections 110.0
EXCEPTION 1 to Section 150.2(a): Additions 1,000 square feet or less are exempt from the requirements to
provide dwelling unit mechanical ventilation airflow as specified by Section 150.0(o)1C, 150.0(o)1E, or
150.0(o)1F, however all other applicable requirements specified by Section 150.0(o) shall be met by the
EXCEPTION 2 to Section 150.2(a): Additions of 300 square feet or less are exempt from the roofing
EXCEPTION 3 to Section 150.2(a): Existing inaccessible piping shall not require insulation as defined under
EXCEPTION 4 to Section 150.2(a): Space-Conditioning System. When heating or cooling will be extended
to an addition from the existing system(s), the existing heating and cooling equipment need not comply with Part
6.The heating system capacity must be adequate to meet the minimum requirements of CBC Section 1204.1.
EXCEPTION 5 to Section 150.2(a): Space-Conditioning System Ducts. When ducts are extended from an
existing duct system to serve the addition, the existing duct system and the extended ducts shall meet the
applicable requirements specified in Section 150.2(b)1D.
EXCEPTION 6 to Section 150.2(a): Additions 1,000 square feet or less are exempt from the Ventilation
EXCEPTION 7 to Section 150.2(a): Photovoltaic systems, as specified in Section 150.1(c)14, are not required
1. Prescriptive approach. Additions to existing buildings shall meet the following additional requirements:
A. Additions that are greater than 700 square feet shall meet the requirements of Section 150.1(c), with the
i. Extensions of existing wood-framed walls may retain the dimensions of the existing walls and
shall install cavity insulation of R-15 in a 2x4 framing and R-21 in a 2x6 framing.
ii. The maximum allowed fenestration area shall be the greater of 175 square feet or 20 percent of the
addition floor area, and the maximum allowed west-facing fenestration area shall be the greater of
70 square feet or the requirements of Section 150.1(c).
iii. When existing siding of a wood-framed wall is not being removed or replaced, cavity insulation of
R-15 in a 2x4 framing and R-21 in a 2x6 framing shall be installed and continuous insulation is not
iv. Additions that consist of the conversion of existing spaces from unconditioned to conditioned
space shall not be required to perform the following as part of QII:
a. Existing window and door headers shall not be required to be insulated.
SECTION 150.2 – ENERGY EFFICIENCY STANDARDS FOR ADDITIONS AND ALTERATIONS TO EXISTING
Page 302 2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards
b. Air sealing shall not be required when the existing air barrier is not being removed or
B. Additions that are 700 square feet or less shall meet the requirements of Section 150.1(c), with the
i. Roof and Ceiling insulation in an attic shall be insulated to R-38 in climate zones 1 and 11-16 or
ii. Radiant barriers shall be installed in climate zones 2-15.
iii. Extensions of existing wood-framed walls may retain the dimensions of the existing walls and
shall install cavity insulation of R-15 in a 2×4 framing and R-21 in a 2×6 framing.
iv. In Climate Zones 2, 4 and 6-15; the maximum allowed west-facing fenestration area shall not be
greater than 60 square feet; and shall also comply with either a or b below:
a. For additions that are 700 square feet or less but greater than 400 square feet, the maximum
allowed fenestration area limit is the greater of 120 square feet or 25 percent of the
conditioned floor area of the addition; or
b. For additions that are 400 square feet or less, the maximum allowed fenestration area is the
greater of 75 square feet or 30 percent of the conditioned floor area of the addition.
v. Quality Insulation Installation (QII) requirements of Section 150.1(c)1E do not apply.
vi. When existing siding of a wood-framed wall is not being removed or replaced, cavity insulation of
R-15 in a 2×4 framing and R-21 in a 2×6 framing shall be installed and continuous insulation is not
EXCEPTION to Section 150.2(a)1B: Insulation in an enclosed rafter ceiling shall meet the
C. Mechanical Ventilation for Indoor Air Quality.
i. Additions to an existing dwelling unit that increase the conditioned floor area of the existing
dwelling unit by more than 1,000 square feet shall have mechanical ventilation airflow in
ventilation airflow rate shall be based on the conditioned floor area of the entire dwelling unit
comprised of the existing dwelling unit conditioned floor area plus the addition conditioned floor
ii. New dwelling units that are additions to an existing building shall have mechanical ventilation
airflow provided in accordance with Sections 150.0(o)1C, 150.0(o)1E, or 150.0(o)1F as applicable.
The mechanical ventilation airflow rate shall be based on the conditioned floor area of the new
D. Water Heater. When a second water heater is installed as part of the addition, one of the following
types of water heaters shall be installed:
i. A water-heating system that meets the requirements of Section 150.1(c)8; or
ii. A water-heating system determined by the Executive Director to use no more energy than the one
2. Performance approach. Performance calculations shall meet the requirements of Section 150.1(a) through
(c), pursuant to the applicable requirements in Items A, B, and C below.
A. For additions alone. The addition complies if the addition alone meets the energy budgets as specified
B. Existing plus alteration plus addition. The standard design for existing plus alteration plus addition
energy use is the combination of the existing building’s unaltered components to remain; existing
building altered components that are the more efficient, in TDV energy, of either the existing
conditions or the requirements of Section 150.2(b)2; plus the proposed addition's energy use meeting
the requirements of Section 150.2(a)1. The proposed design energy use is the combination of the
SECTION 150.2 – ENERGY EFFICIENCY STANDARDS FOR ADDITIONS AND ALTERATIONS TO EXISTING
2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards Page 303
existing building’s unaltered components to remain and the altered components’ energy features, plus
the proposed energy features of the addition.
EXCEPTION to Section 150.2(a)2B: Existing structures with a minimum R-11 insulation in framed
walls showing compliance with Section 150.2(a)2 are exempt from showing compliance with Section
C. Mechanical Ventilation for Indoor Air Quality.
i. Additions to an existing dwelling unit that increase the conditioned floor area of the existing
dwelling unit by more than 1,000 square feet shall have mechanical ventilation airflow in
ventilation airflow rate shall be based on the conditioned floor area of the entire dwelling unit
comprised of the existing dwelling unit conditioned floor area plus the addition conditioned floor
ii. New dwelling units that are additions to an existing building shall have mechanical ventilation
airflow provided in accordance with Section 150.0(o)1C, 150.0(o)1E, or 150.0(o)1F as applicable.
The mechanical ventilation airflow rate shall be based on the conditioned floor area of the new
(b) Alterations. Alterations to existing low-rise residential buildings or alterations in conjunction with a change in
building occupancy to a low-rise residential occupancy shall meet either Item 1 or 2 below.
1. Prescriptive approach. The altered component and any newly installed equipment serving the alteration
shall meet the applicable requirements of Sections 110.0 through 110.9 and all applicable requirements of
A. Fenestration. Alterations that add vertical fenestration and skylight area shall meet the total
fenestration area and west facing fenestration area, U-factor, and Solar Heat Gain Coefficient
requirements of Section 150.1(c) and TABLE 150.1-A or B.
EXCEPTION 1 to Section 150.2(b)1A: Alterations that add fenestration area of up to 75 square feet
shall not be required to meet the total fenestration area and west-facing fenestration area requirements
EXCEPTION 2 to Section 150.2(b)1A: Alterations that add up to 16 square feet of new skylight area
with a maximum U-factor of 0.55 and a maximum SHGC of 0.30 area shall not be required to meet the
total fenestration area and west-facing fenestration area requirements of Sections 150.1(c)3B and C.
B. Replacement Fenestration. New manufactured fenestration products installed to replace existing
fenestration products of the same total area shall meet the U-factor and Solar Heat Gain Coefficient
EXCEPTION 1 to Section 150.2(b)1B: Replacement of vertical fenestration no greater than 75 square
feet with a U-factor no greater than 0.40 in Climate Zones 1-16, and a SHGC value no greater than 0.35
EXCEPTION 2 to Section 150.2(b)1B: Replaced skylights must meet a U-factor no greater than 0.55,
and a SHGC value no greater than 0.30.
NOTE: Glass replaced in an existing sash and frame or sashes replaced in an existing frame are
considered repairs, provided that the replacement is at least equivalent to the original in performance.
C. Entirely New or Complete Replacement Space-Conditioning Systems installed as part of an
alteration, shall include all the system heating or cooling equipment, including but not limited to
condensing unit and cooling or heating coil for split systems; or complete replacement of a package
unit; plus entirely new or replacement duct system (Section 150.2(b)1Diia); plus a new or replacement
air handler. Entirely new or complete replacement space-conditioning systems shall:
ii. Be limited to natural gas, liquefied petroleum gas, or the existing fuel type.
SECTION 150.2 – ENERGY EFFICIENCY STANDARDS FOR ADDITIONS AND ALTERATIONS TO EXISTING
Page 304 2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards
EXCEPTION to Section 150.2(b)1Cii: When the fuel type of the replaced heating system was
natural gas or liquefied petroleum gas, the new or complete replacement space-conditioning system
D. Altered Duct Systems - Duct Sealing: In all Climate Zones, when more than 40 feet of new or
replacement space-conditioning system ducts are installed, the ducts shall comply with the applicable
requirements of subsections i and ii below. Additionally, when altered ducts, air-handling units, cooling
or heating coils, or plenums are located in garage spaces, the system shall comply with subsection
150.2(b)1Diic regardless of the length of any new or replacement space-conditioning ducts installed in
i. New ducts located in unconditioned space shall meet the applicable requirements of Sections
TABLE 150.2-A DUCT INSULATION R-VALUE
ii. The altered duct system, regardless of location, shall be sealed as confirmed through field
verification and diagnostic testing in accordance with all applicable procedures for duct sealing of
altered existing duct systems as specified in the Reference Residential Appendix Section RA3.1,
utilizing the leakage compliance criteria specified in Subsection a or b below.
a. Entirely New or Complete Replacement Duct System. If the new ducts form an entirely
new or complete replacement duct system directly connected to the air handler, the duct
system shall meet one of the following requirements:
I. For single family dwellings, the measured duct leakage shall be equal to or less than 5
percent of the system air handler airflow as confirmed by field verification and diagnostic
testing utilizing the procedures in Reference Residential Appendix Section RA3.1.4.3.1.
II. For multifamily dwellings, regardless of duct system location,
A. The total leakage of the duct system shall not exceed 12 percent of the nominal
system air handler airflow as determined utilizing the procedures in Reference
B. The duct system leakage to outside shall not exceed 6 percent of the nominal system
air handler airflow as determined utilizing the procedures in Reference Residential
Entirely new or complete replacement duct systems installed as part of an alteration shall be
constructed of at least 75 percent new duct material, and up to 25 percent may consist of
reused parts from the dwelling unit's existing duct system, including but not limited to
registers, grilles, boots, air handler, coil, plenums, duct material; if the reused parts are
accessible and can be sealed to prevent leakage.
Entirely new or complete replacement duct systems shall also conform to the requirements of
b. Extension of an Existing Duct System. If the new ducts are an extension of an existing duct
system serving single family or multifamily dwellings, the combined new and existing duct
system shall meet one of the following requirements:
I. The measured duct leakage shall be equal to or less than 15 percent of nominal system air
handler airflow as confirmed by field verification and diagnostic testing utilizing the
procedures in Reference Residential Appendix Section RA3.1.4.3.1; or
II. The measured duct leakage to outside shall be equal to or less than 10 percent of nominal
system air handler airflow as confirmed by field verification and diagnostic testing
utilizing the procedures in Reference Residential Appendix Section RA3.1.4.3.4; or
III. If it is not possible to meet the duct sealing requirements of either Section 150.2(b)1DiibI,
or 150.2(b)1DiibII, then all accessible leaks shall be sealed and verified through a visual
SECTION 150.2 – ENERGY EFFICIENCY STANDARDS FOR ADDITIONS AND ALTERATIONS TO EXISTING
2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards Page 305
inspection and a smoke test by a certified HERS Rater utilizing the methods specified in
EXCEPTION to Section 150.2(b)1Diib: Duct Sealing. Existing duct systems that are
extended, which are constructed, insulated or sealed with asbestos.
c. Altered Ducts and Duct System Components in Garage Spaces. When new or replacement
space-conditioning ducts, air-handling units, cooling or heating coils, or plenums are located
in a garage space, compliance with either I or II below is required.
I. The measured system duct leakage shall be less than or equal to 6 percent of system air
handler airflow as determined utilizing the procedures in Reference Residential Appendix
II. All accessible leaks located in the garage space shall be sealed and verified through a
visual inspection and a smoke test by a certified HERS Rater utilizing the methods
specified in Reference Residential Appendix RA3.1.4.3.5.
E. Altered space-conditioning system - duct sealing. In all Climate Zones, when a space-conditioning
system serving a single family or multifamily dwelling is altered by the installation or replacement of
space-conditioning system equipment, including replacement of the air handler, outdoor condensing
unit of a split system air conditioner or heat pump, or cooling or heating coil; the duct system that is
connected to the altered space-conditioning system equipment shall be sealed, as confirmed through
field verification and diagnostic testing in accordance with the applicable procedures for duct sealing of
altered existing duct systems as specified in Reference Residential Appendix RA3.1 and the leakage
compliance criteria specified in subsection i, ii, or iii below. Additionally, when altered ducts, air-
handling units, cooling or heating coils, or plenums are located in garage spaces, the system shall
comply with Section 150.2(b)1Diic regardless of the length of any new or replacement space-
conditioning ducts installed in the garage space.
i. The measured duct leakage shall be equal to or less than 15 percent of system air handler airflow
as determined utilizing the procedures in Reference Residential Appendix Section RA3.1.4.3.1; or
ii. The measured duct leakage to outside shall be equal to or less than 10 percent of system air handler
airflow as determined utilizing the procedures in Reference Residential Appendix Section
iii. If it is not possible to meet the duct sealing requirements of either Section 150.2(b)1Ei or Section
150.2(b)1Eii, then, all accessible leaks shall be sealed and verified through a visual inspection and
a smoke test by a certified HERS Rater utilizing the methods specified in Reference Residential
EXCEPTION 1 to Section 150.2(b)1E: Duct sealing. Duct systems that are documented to have been
previously sealed as confirmed through field verification and diagnostic testing in accordance with
procedures in the Reference Residential Appendix RA3.1.
EXCEPTION 2 to Section 150.2(b)1E: Duct sealing. Duct systems with less than 40 linear feet as
EXCEPTION 3 to Section 150.2(b)1E: Duct sealing. Existing duct systems constructed, insulated or
F. Altered space-conditioning system - mechanical cooling. When a space-conditioning system is an air
conditioner or heat pump that is altered by the installation or replacement of refrigerant-containing
system components such as the compressor, condensing coil, evaporator coil, refrigerant metering
device or refrigerant piping, the altered system shall comply with the following requirements:
i. All thermostats associated with the system shall be replaced with setback thermostats meeting the
pumps, including but not limited to ducted split systems, ducted package systems, small duct high
velocity air systems, and minisplit systems, shall comply with subsections a and b, unless the
SECTION 150.2 – ENERGY EFFICIENCY STANDARDS FOR ADDITIONS AND ALTERATIONS TO EXISTING
Page 306 2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards
system is of a type that cannot be verified using the specified procedures. Systems that cannot
comply with the requirements of 150.2(b)1Fii shall comply with 150.2(b)1Fiii.
EXCEPTION to Section 150.2(b)1Fii: Entirely new or complete replacement packaged systems
for which the manufacturer has verified correct system refrigerant charge prior to shipment from
the factory are not required to have refrigerant charge confirmed through field verification and
diagnostic testing. The installer of these packaged systems shall certify on the Certificate of
Installation that the packaged system was pre-charged at the factory and has not been altered in a
way that would affect the charge. Ducted systems shall comply with minimum system airflow rate
requirement in Section 150.2(b)1Fiia, provided that the system is of a type that can be verified
using the procedure specified in RA3.3 or an approved alternative in RA1.
a. Minimum system airflow rate shall comply with the applicable subsection I or II below as
confirmed through field verification and diagnostic testing in accordance with the procedures
specified in Reference Residential Appendix Section RA3.3 or an approved alternative
I. Small duct high velocity systems shall demonstrate a minimum system airflow rate
greater than or equal to 250 cfm per ton of nominal cooling capacity; or
II. All other air-cooled air conditioner or air-source heat pump systems shall demonstrate a
minimum system airflow rate greater than or equal to 300 cfm per ton of nominal cooling
EXCEPTION 1 to Section 150.2(b)1Fiia: Systems unable to comply with the minimum
airflow rate requirement shall demonstrate compliance using the procedures in Section
RA3.3.3.1.5; and the system's thermostat shall conform to the specifications in Section 110.12.
EXCEPTION 2 to Section 150.2(b)Fiia: Entirely new or complete replacement space
conditioning systems, as specified by section 150.2(b)1C, without zoning dampers may
comply with the minimum airflow rate by meeting the applicable requirements in TABLE-
150.0-B or 150.0-C as confirmed by field verification and diagnostic testing in accordance
with the procedures in Reference Residential Appendix Section RA3.1.4.4 and RA3.1.4.5. The
design clean-filter pressure drop requirements of Section 150.0(m)12C for the system air filter
device(s) shall conform to the requirements given in TABLES 150.0-B and 150.0-C.
b. The installer shall charge the system according to manufacturer’s specifications. Refrigerant
charge shall be verified according to one of the following options, as applicable.
I. The installer and rater shall perform the standard charge verification procedure as
specified in Reference Residential Appendix Section RA3.2.2, or an approved alternative
II. The system shall be equipped with a fault indicator display (FID) device that meets the
specifications of Reference Joint Appendix JA6. The installer shall verify the refrigerant
charge and FID device in accordance with the procedures in Reference Residential
Appendix Section RA3.4.2. The HERS Rater shall verify FID device in accordance with
III. The installer shall perform the weigh-in charging procedure as specified by Reference
Residential Appendix Section RA3.2.3.1 provided the system is of a type that can be
verified using the RA3.2.2 standard charge verification procedure and RA3.3 airflow rate
verification procedure or approved alternatives in RA1. The HERS Rater shall verify the
charge using RA3.2.2 and RA3.3 or approved alternatives in RA1.
EXCEPTION 1 to Section 150.2(b)1Fiib: When the outdoor temperature is less than 55° F
and the installer utilizes the weigh-in charging procedure in Reference Residential Appendix
Section RA3.2.3.1to demonstrate compliance, the installer may elect to utilize the HERS Rater
verification procedure in Reference Residential Appendix Section RA3.2.3.2. If the HERS
Rater verification procedure in Section RA3.2.3.2 is used for compliance, the system's
thermostat shall conform to the specifications in Section 110.12. Ducted systems shall comply
with the minimum system airflow rate requirements in Section 150.2(b)1Fiia.
SECTION 150.2 – ENERGY EFFICIENCY STANDARDS FOR ADDITIONS AND ALTERATIONS TO EXISTING
2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards Page 307
heat pumps, including but not limited to ducted split systems, ducted package systems, small
duct high velocity, and minisplit systems, which are of a type that cannot comply with the
requirements of 150.2(b)1Fiib shall comply with subsections a and b, as applicable.
a. The installer shall confirm the refrigerant charge using the weigh-in charging procedure
specified in Reference Residential Appendix Section RA3.2.3.1, as verified by a HERS
Rater according to the procedures specified in Reference Residential Appendix
b. Systems that utilize forced air ducts shall comply with the minimum system airflow rate
requirement in Section 150.2(b)1Fiia provided the system is of a type that can be verified
using the procedures in Section RA3.3 or an approved alternative procedure in Section
EXCEPTION to Section 150.2(b)1Fiii: Entirely new or complete replacement packaged
systems for which the manufacturer has verified correct system refrigerant charge prior to
shipment from the factory are not required to have refrigerant charge confirmed through field
verification and diagnostic testing. The installer of these packaged systems shall certify on the
Certificate of Installation that the packaged system was pre-charged at the factory and has not
been altered in a way that would affect the charge. Ducted systems shall comply with
minimum system airflow rate requirement in Section 150.2(b)1Fiiib, provided that the system
is of a type that can be verified using the procedure specified in Section RA3.3 or an approved
G. Altered Space-Conditioning System. Replacement space-conditioning systems shall be limited to
natural gas, liquefied petroleum gas, or the existing fuel type.
EXCEPTION to Section 150.2(b)1G: When the fuel type of the replaced heating system was
natural gas or liquefied petroleum gas, the replacement space-conditioning system may be a heat
H. Water-Heating System. Altered or replacement service water-heating systems or components
shall meet the applicable requirements below:
i. Pipe Insulation. For newly installed piping, the insulation requirements of Section 150.0(j)2
shall be met. For existing accessible piping the applicable requirements of Section
ii. Distribution System. For recirculation distribution systems serving individual dwelling units,
only Demand Recirculation Systems with manual on/off control as specified in the Reference
iii. Water heating system. The water heating system shall meet one of the following:
a. A natural gas or propane water-heating system; or
b. For Climate Zones 1 through 15, a single heat pump water heater. The storage tank shall
not be located outdoors and be placed on an incompressible, rigid insulated surface with a
minimum thermal resistance of R-10. The water heater shall be installed with a
communication interface that meets either the requirements of 110.12(a); or
c. For Climate Zones 1 through 15, a single heat pump water heater that meets the
requirements of NEEA Advanced Water Heater Specification Tier 3 or higher. The
storage tank shall not be located outdoors; or
d. If no natural gas is connected to the existing water heater location, a consumer electric
e. A water-heating system determined by the executive director to use no more energy than
the one specified in Item a above; or if no natural gas is connected to the existing water
heater location, a water-heating system determined by the executive director to use no
more energy than the one specified in Item d above.
SECTION 150.2 – ENERGY EFFICIENCY STANDARDS FOR ADDITIONS AND ALTERATIONS TO EXISTING
Page 308 2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards
I. Roofs. Replacements of the exterior surface of existing roofs, including adding a new surface layer on
top of the existing exterior surface, shall meet the requirements of Section 110.8 and the applicable
requirements of Subsections i and ii where more than 50 percent of the roof is being replaced.
i. Low-rise residential buildings with steep-sloped roofs. Climate Zones 10 through 15 shall have
a minimum aged solar reflectance of 0.20 and a minimum thermal emittance of 0.75, or a
EXCEPTION to Section 150.2(b)1Ii: The following shall be considered equivalent to Subsection
a. Air-space of 1.0 inch (25 mm) is provided between the top of the roof deck to the bottom of
b. The installed roofing product has a profile ratio of rise to width of 1 to 5 for 50 percent or
greater of the width of the roofing product; or
c. Existing ducts in the attic are insulated and sealed according to Section 150.1(c)9; or
d. Buildings with at least R-38 ceiling insulation; or
e. Buildings with a radiant barrier in the attic meeting the requirements of Section 150.1(c)2; or
f. Buildings that have no ducts in the attic; or
g. In Climate Zones 10-15, R-2 or greater insulation above the roof deck.
ii. Low-sloped roofs. Climate Zones 13 and 15 shall have a 3-year aged solar reflectance equal or
greater than 0.63 and a thermal emittance equal or greater than 0.75, or a minimum SRI of 75.
EXCEPTION 1 to Section 150.2(b)1Iii: Buildings with no ducts in the attic.
EXCEPTION 2 to Section 150.2(b)1Iii: The aged solar reflectance can be met by using
insulation at the roof deck specified in TABLE 150.2-B.
J. Lighting. The altered lighting system shall meet the lighting requirements of Section 150.0(k). The
altered luminaires shall meet the luminaire efficacy requirements of Section 150.0(k) and TABLE
150.0-A. Where existing screw base sockets are present in ceiling-recessed luminaires, removal of
these sockets is not required provided that new JA8 compliant trim kits or lamps designed for use with
recessed downlights or luminaires are installed.
The altered component(s) and any newly installed equipment serving the alteration shall meet the applicable
A. The altered components shall meet the applicable requirements of Sections 110.0 through 110.9,
(q). Entirely new or complete replacement space-conditioning systems, and entirely new or complete
replacement duct systems, as these terms are used in Sections 150.2(b)1C, and 150.2(b)1Diia, shall
B. The standard design for an altered component shall be the higher efficiency of existing conditions or
the requirements stated in TABLE 150.2-C. For components not being altered, the standard design shall
be based on the existing conditions. When the third party verification option is specified as a
requirement, all components proposed for alteration for which the additional credit is taken, must be
SECTION 150.2 – ENERGY EFFICIENCY STANDARDS FOR ADDITIONS AND ALTERATIONS TO EXISTING
2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards Page 309
TABLE 150.2-B AGED SOLAR REFLECTANCE INSULATION TRADE OFF TABLE
Roof Deck Insulation Roof Deck Insulation
Aged Solar Reflectance Aged Solar Reflectance
TABLE 150.2-C STANDARD DESIGN FOR AN ALTERED COMPONENT
Standard Design With Third Party
Altered Component Verification of Existing Conditions Shall
Wall Insulation, and The existing insulation R-value
If the proposed U-factor is ≤ 0.40 and SHGC value is
≤ 0.35, the standard design shall be based on the
The U-factor of 0.40 and SHGC value of
existing U-factor and SHGC values as verified.
Fenestration 0.35. The glass area shall be the glass
Otherwise, the standard design shall be based on the
U-factor of 0.40 and SHGC value of 0.35. The glass
area shall be the glass area of the existing building.
The U-factor of 0.40 and SHGC value of The existing fenestration in the alteration shall be
If the proposed U-factor is < 0.20, the standard design
The U-factor of 0.20. The door area shall be based on the existing U-factor value as
Doors shall be the door area of the existing verified. Otherwise, the standard design shall be based
building. on the U-factor of 0.20. The door area shall be the door
Space-Heating and Space- Section 150.2(b)1C for entirely new or
Cooling Equipment complete replacement systems;
The proposed efficiency levels. The existing efficiency levels.
Water Heating Systems The existing efficiency level.
Roofing Products The requirements of Section 150.2(b)1H.
All Other Measures The proposed efficiency levels. The existing efficiency levels.
B. The proposed design shall be based on the actual values of the altered components.
1. If an existing component must be replaced with a new component, that component is considered an altered
component for the purpose of determining the standard design altered component energy budget and must
meet the requirements of Section 150.2(b)2B.
2. The standard design shall assume the same geometry and orientation as the proposed design.
3. The “existing efficiency level” modeling rules, including situations where nameplate data is not available,
are described in the Residential ACM Approval Manual.
SECTION 150.2 – ENERGY EFFICIENCY STANDARDS FOR ADDITIONS AND ALTERATIONS TO EXISTING
Page 310 2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards
EXCEPTION 1 to Section 150.2(b): Any dual-glazed greenhouse or garden window installed as part of an
alteration complies with the U-factor requirements in Section 150.1(c)3.
EXCEPTION 2 to Section 150.2(b): Where the space in the attic or rafter area is not large enough to
accommodate the required R-value, the entire space shall be filled with insulation provided such installation
does not violate Section 1203.2 of Title 24, Part 2.
(c) Whole Building. Any addition or alteration may comply with the requirements of Title 24, Part 6 by meeting
the requirements for the entire building.
SECTION 150.2 – ENERGY EFFICIENCY STANDARDS FOR ADDITIONS AND ALTERATIONS TO EXISTING
2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards Page 311
CALIFORNIA MECHANICAL CODE, CALIFORNIA CODE OF
REGULATIONS, TITLE 24, PART 4 CHAPTER 6, DUCT SYSTEMS
Adopt Entire Chapter as amended CEC
CALIFORNIA MECHANICAL CODE, CALIFORNIA CODE OF REGULATIONS, TITLE 24, PART 4 CHAPTER 6,
Page 312 2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards
STANDARDS AND DOCUMENTS REFERENCED IN THE ENERGY
The following documents are incorporated by reference to the extent they are referenced in the Energy Code.
AIR-CONDITIONING, HEATING AND REFRIGERATION INSTITUTE
AHRI 210/240-08 Performance Rating of Unitary Air Conditioning and Air-Source Heat Pump Equipment (2008
AHRI 310/380-17 Packaged Terminal Air-Conditioners and Heat Pumps (2017)
AHRI 320-98 Water-Source Heat Pumps
AHRI 325-98 Ground Water-Source Heat Pumps (1998)
Performance Rating of Commercial and Industrial Unitary Air-Conditioning and Heat Pump
ANSI/AHRI 365-09 Commercial and Industrial Unitary Air-Conditioning Condensing Units (2009)
ANSI/AHRI 390-03 Performance Rating of Single Package Vertical Air Conditioners and Heat Pumps
ANSI/AHRI 400-15 Liquid to Liquid Heat Exchangers (2015)
ANSI/AHRI 460-05 Performance Rating of Remote Mechanical-Draft Air-Cooled Refrigerant Condensers (2005)
AHRI 550/590-15 Performance Rating of Water-Chilling Packages Using the Vapor Compression Cycle (2015)
ANSI/AHRI 560-00 Absorption Water Chilling and Water Heating Packages (2000)
AHRI 680 Performance Rating of Residential Air Filter Equipment (2015)
AHRI 1230-14 Performance Rating of Variable Refrigerant Flow (VRF) Multi-Split Air-Conditioning and
Available from: Air-Conditioning, Heating and Refrigeration Institute
Manual J—Residential Load Calculation, Eighth Edition (2016)
AMERICAN ARCHITECTURAL MANUFACTURERS ASSOCIATION
WINDOW AND DOOR MANUFACTURERS ASSOCIATION
NAFS 2011 – North American Fenestration Standard/Specification for Windows, Doors, and
STANDARDS AND DOCUMENTS REFERENCED IN THE ENERGY CODE
2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards Page 313
AMERICAN CONFERENCE OF GOVERNMENTAL INDUSTRIAL HYGENISTS
2018 Threshold Limit Values (TLVS) and Biological Exposure Indices (BEIS)
AMERICAN NATIONAL STANDARDS INSTITUTE
ANSI Z21.10.3-17 Gas Water Heaters, Volume 1, Storage Water Heaters with Input Ratings above 75,000 Btu/h
ANSI Z21.13-17 Gas-Fired Low Pressure Steam and Hot Water Boilers (2017)
ANSI Z21.40.4-17 Performance Testing and Rating of Gas-Fired, Air-Conditioning and Heat Pump Appliances
ANSI Z83.8-16 Gas Unit Heaters and Gas-Fired Duct Furnaces (2016)
Available from: American National Standards Institute
ANSI/NSPI-5-03 Residential Inground Swimming Pools (2003)
ANSI C82.6-15 Ballasts for High-Intensity Discharge Lamps—Methods of Measurement (2015)
Available from: Association of Pool & Spa Professionals
AMERICAN SOCIETY OF HEATING, REFRIGERATING AND AIR-CONDITIONING ENGINEERS
Method of Testing General Ventilation Air-Cleaning Devices for Removal Efficiency by
Thermal Environment Conditions for Human Occupancy
Ventilation and Acceptable Indoor Air Quality in Low-Rise Residential Buildings
STANDARDS AND DOCUMENTS REFERENCED IN THE ENERGY CODE
Page 314 2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards
Method of Test for Determining the Air tightness of HVAC Equipment (RA 2014)
HVAC Systems and Equipment (2016)
Refrigerating and Air-Conditioning Engineers
AMERICAN SOCIETY OF HEATING, REFRIGERATING AND AIR-CONDITIONING ENGINEERS
ASHRAE Climatic Data for Region × Arizona, California, Hawaii, Nevada, Publication SPCDX, 1982, ISBN
AMERICAN SOCIETY OF MECHANICAL ENGINEERS
ASME A17.1-2016 Safety Code for Elevators and Escalators (2016)
AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR TESTING AND MATERIALS / ASTM INTERNATIONAL
ASTM C55-17 Standard Specifications for Concrete Brick (2017)
ASTM C177-13 Standard Test Method for Steady-State Heat Flux Measurements and Thermal Transmission
Properties by Means of the Guarded Hot Plate Apparatus (2013)
ASTM C272-16 Standard Test Method for Water Absorption of Core Materials for Structural Sandwich
Standard Test Method for Steady-State Heat Transfer Properties of Horizontal Pipe Insulation
ASTM C518-17 Standard Test Method for Steady-State Thermal Transmission Properties by Means of the
Heat Flow Meter Apparatus (2017)
ASTM C731-15 Standard Test Method for Extrudability, After Package Aging, of Latex Sealants (2015)
ASTM C732-17 Standard Test Method for Aging Effects of Artificial Weathering on Latex Sealants (2017)
Standard Specification for High Solids Content, Cold Liquid-Applied Elastomeric
Waterproofing Membrane for Use with Separate Wearing Course (2015)
ASTM C1167-11 Standard Specification for Clay Roof Tiles (2011)
STANDARDS AND DOCUMENTS REFERENCED IN THE ENERGY CODE
2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards Page 315
ASTM C1371-15 Standard Test Method for Determination of Emittance of Materials Near Room Temperature
ASTM C1492-16 Standard Specification for Concrete Roof Tile (2016)
ASTM C1549-16 Standard Test Method for Determination of Solar Reflectance Near Ambient Temperature
Using a Portable Solar Reflectometer (2016)
ASTM C1583-13 Standard Test Method for Tensile Strength of Concrete Surfaces and the Bond Strength or
Tensile Strength of Concrete Repair and Overlay Materials by Direct Tension (Pull-off Method)
ASTM D448-17 Standard Classification for Sizes of Aggrerate for Road and Bridge Construction (2017)
ASTM D522-17 Standard Test Methods for Mandrel Bend Test of Attached Organic Coatings (2017)
ASTM D822-13 Standard Practice for Filtered Open-Flame Carbon-Arc Exposures of Paint and Related
ASTM D1003-13 Standard Test Method for Haze and Luminous Transmittance of Transparent Plastics (2013)
ASTM D1653-13 Standard Test Methods for Water Vapor Transmission of Organic Coating Films (2013)
ASTM D1863-11 Standard Specification for Mineral Aggregate Used on Built-Up Roofs (2011)
ASTM D2370-16 Standard Test Method for Tensile
ASTM D2824-13 Standard Specification for Aluminum-Pigmented Asphalt Roof Coatings, Nonfibered,
Asbestos Fibered, and Fibered without Asbestos (2013)
ASTM D3468-13 Standard Specification for Liquid-Applied Neoprene and Chlorosulfonated Polyethylene Used in
Standard Guide for Application of Aluminum-Pigmented Asphalt Roof Coatings (2016)
ASTM D4798/16 Standard Test Method Accelerated Weathering Test Conditions and Procedures for
ASTM D5870-16 Standard Practice for Calculating Property Retention Index of Plastics (2016)
ASTM D6083-05e1 Standard Specification for Liquid- Applied Acrylic Coating Used in Roofing (2005)
Standard Specification for Liquid- Applied Silicone Coating Used in Spray Polyurethane
ASTM E96-16 Standard Test Methods for Water Vapor Transmission of Materials (2016)
ASTM E283-12 Standard Test Method for Determining the Rate of Air Leakage Through Exterior Windows,
Curtain Walls, and Doors Under Specified Pressure Differences Across the Specimen (2012)
ASTM E408-13 Standard Test Methods for Total Normal Emittance of Surfaces Using Inspection-Meter
ASTM E972-13 Standard Test Method for Solar Photometric Transmittance of Sheet Materials Using Sunlight
ASTM E1918-16 Standard Test Method for Measuring Solar Reflectance of Horizontal and Low-Sloped
ASTM E1980-1 Standard Practice for Calculating Solar Reflectance Index of Horizontal and Low-Sloped
ASTM E2178-13 Standard Test Method for Air Permeance of Building Materials (2013)
ASTM E2357-17 Standard Test Method for Determining Air Leakage of Air Barrier Assemblies (2017)
ASTM E779-10 Standard Test Method for Determining Air Leakage Rate by Fan Pressurization (2010)
ASTM E1677-11 Standard Specification for an Air Retarder (AR) Material or System for Low-Rise Framed
STANDARDS AND DOCUMENTS REFERENCED IN THE ENERGY CODE
Page 316 2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards
100 Barr Harbor Drive West
CALIFORNIA BUILDING STANDARDS COMMISSION
Available from: California Building Standards Commission
Alternative Calculation Method (ACM) Manual
Available from: California Energy Commission
CALIFORNIA DEPARTMENT OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS
Standards for Insulating Material
Available from: California Department of Consumer Affairs
Bureau of Electronic and Appliance Repair, Home Furnishings and Thermal Insulation
CTI ATC-105-00 Acceptance Test Code for Water Cooling Towers (2000)
CTI STD-201-15 Standard for the Certification of Water-Cooling Tower Thermal Performance (2015)
Available from: Cooling Technology Institute
COOL ROOF RATING COUNCIL
CRRC-1 Product Rating Program Manual (2018)
Available from: Cool Roof Rating Council
STANDARDS AND DOCUMENTS REFERENCED IN THE ENERGY CODE
2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards Page 317
HI Heating Boiler Standard 86, 6th Edition (1989)
The IES Lighting Handbook, Tenth Edition (2011)
IES LM-79-08 Electrical and Photometric Measurements of Solid-State Lighting Products (2008)
INTERNATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF PLUMBING AND MECHANICAL OFFICIALS
Available from: International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials
Available from: International Code Council
INTERNATIONAL ORGANIZATION FOR STANDARDIZATION
ISO-13256-1 Water-Source Heat Pumps-Testing and Rating for Performance-Part 1: Water-to-Air and
ISO-13256-2 Water-Source Heat pumps—Testing and rating for Performance—Part 1: Water-to-Water and
INTERNATIONAL WINDOW FILM ASSOCIATION
Visual Quality Standard for Applied Window Film
Visual Quality Standard for Applied Window Film (Re-endorsed 2015)
Available from: International Window Film Association
STANDARDS AND DOCUMENTS REFERENCED IN THE ENERGY CODE
Page 318 2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards
NATIONAL ELECTRICAL MANUFACTURERS ASSOCIATION
NEMA SSL 7A-2015 “Phase Cut Dimming for Solid State Lighting: Basic Compatibility”
NATIONAL FENESTRATION RATING COUNCIL
NFRC 100 Procedure for Determining Fenestration Product U-factors (2017)
NFRC 200 Procedure for Determining Fenestration Product Solar Heat Gain Coefficients and Visible
NFRC 202 Procedure for Determining Translucent Fenestration Product Visible Transmittance at Normal
NFRC 203 Procedure for Determining Visible Transmittance of Tubular Daylighting Devices (2017)
NFRC 400 Procedure for Determining Fenestration Product Air Leakage (2017)
Available from: National Fenestration Rating Council
NSF INTERNATIONAL (FORMERLY NATIONAL SANITATION FOUNDATION)
NSF/ANSI 50 (2016) Circulation System Components and
Related Materials for Swimming Pools, Spas/Hot Tubs (2016)
RESIDENTIAL ENERGY SERVICES NETWORK
Standard for Testing Airtightness of Building Enclosures, Airtightness of Heating and Cooling
Air Distribution Systems, and Airflow of Mechanical Ventilation Systems (2016)
Available from: Residential Energy Services Network, Inc. (RESNET)
SHEET METAL AND AIR-CONDITIONING CONTRACTORS’ NATIONAL ASSOCIATION
Residential Comfort System Installation Standards Manual (2016)
Available from: Sheet Metal and Air-Conditioning Contractors’ National Association (SMACNA)
UL 181 Standard for Safety for Factory-made Air Ducts and Connectors (2017)
UL 181A Standard for Safety for Closure Systems for Use with Rigid Air Ducts and Air Connectors
STANDARDS AND DOCUMENTS REFERENCED IN THE ENERGY CODE
2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards Page 319
UL 18IB Standard for Safety for Closure Systems for Use with Flexible Air Ducts and Air Connectors
UL 723 Standard for Test for Surface Burning Characteristics of Building Materials (2017)
UL 727 Standard for Oil-Fired Central Furnaces (2006)
UL 731 Standard for Oil-Fired Unit Heaters (2012)
UL 1077 Standard for Supplementary Protectors for Use in Electrical Equipment (2015)
UL 1741 Standard for Inverters, Converters, Controllers and Interconnection System Equipment for Use
With Distributed Energy Resources (2018)
UL 1973 Standard for Batteries for Use in Stationary, Vehicle Auxiliary Power and Light Electric Rail
UL 2108 Low Voltage Lighting Systems (2018)
UL 8750 Standard for Light Emitting Diode (LED) Equipment for Use in Lighting Products (2018)
UL 9540 Standard for Energy Storage Systems and Equipment (2016)
STANDARDS AND DOCUMENTS REFERENCED IN THE ENERGY CODE
Page 320 2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards
ENERGY COMMISSION DOCUMENTS INCORPORATED BY
The following documents published by the California Energy Commission are incorporated by reference in their
entirety into the Energy Code:
Referenced appendices for the Building Energy Efficiency Standards for Residential and Nonresidential Buildings,
including the Joint Appendices (JA), the Residential Appendices (RA), and Nonresidential Appendices (NA)
Alternative Calculation Method (ACM) Approval Manual
ENERGY COMMISSION DOCUMENTS INCORPORATED BY REFERENCE IN THEIR ENTIRETY
2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards Page 321
ACCEPTANCE TEST TECHNICIAN CERTIFICATION
AIR CONDITIONING CONTRACTORS OF AMERICA (ACCA)
AIR MOVEMENT AND CONTROL ASSOCIATION (AMCA)
Page 322 2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards
ALTERNATIVE CALCULATION METHOD (ACM) APPROVAL
AMERICAN NATIONAL STANDARDS INSTITUTE
2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards Page 323
AMERICAN SOCIETY OF MECHANICAL ENGINEERS
Page 324 2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards
2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards Page 325
Page 326 2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards
2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards Page 327
Page 328 2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards
2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards Page 329
Page 330 2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards
Equation 140.3-A Relative solar heat gain coefficient,
Equation 140.3-B Vertical fenestration minimum
2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards Page 331
Relative solar heat gain coefficient
Page 332 2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards
2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards Page 333
HOME ENERGY RATING SYSTEM (HERS)
Page 334 2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards
KILO BRITISH THERMAL UNITS PER HOUR
2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards Page 335
Page 336 2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards
Precision commercial and industrial work
2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards Page 337
140.6(c)2, 140.6(c)3 Certified lighting controls acceptance test technician
Wall mounted (outdoor luminaires) ............. 130.2(c)3 Lighting control installation certificate
Lighting control installation requirements .....130.0(e)
LIGHTING CONTROLS - Includes the following:
Page 338 2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards
Nonprogrammable double-throw switch .... 140.6(a)1 LOW
2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards Page 339
Page 340 2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards
NATIONAL ELECTRICAL MANUFACTURERS ASSOCIATION Motion picture theater building ........... TABLE 140.6-B
NONRESIDENTIAL FUNCTION AREAS - Includes the
NONRESIDENTIAL ACM REFERENCE MANUAL .. 141.0(b)3 following:
2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards Page 341
Commercial and industrial storage area: Healthcare facilities: Exam/treatment
Healthcare facilities: Nurse's station .... TABLE 140.6-C
Dining area: Cafeteria/fast food ...........TABLE 140.6-C Healthcare facilities: Patient room ....... TABLE 140.6-C
Dining area: Family dining ....................TABLE 140.6-C Healthcare facilities: Physical therapy
General Commercial and Industrial work
General Commercial and Industrial work area: High
General Commercial and Industrial work area: Low
Page 342 2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards
NORTHWEST ENERGY EFFICIENCY ALLIANCE
Retail sales area: Merchandise sales and showroom OCCUPANT
2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards Page 343
Page 344 2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards
PERMANENTLY INSTALLED STATIC PRESSURE PROBE 150.1(c)
2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards Page 345
Page 346 2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards
RELOCATABLE PUBLIC SCHOOL BUILDING ......... 140.3(a)8 RETURN
RESIDENTIAL SPACE TYPE - Includes the following:
2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards Page 347
SHEET METAL AND AIR CONDITIONING CONTRACTORS
Page 348 2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards
Rating and certification corporation (SRCC) .. 150.0(n)
2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards Page 349
Page 350 2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards
2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards Page 351
VENTILATION SYSTEM – Includes the following:
Page 352 2019 Building Energy Efficiency Standards
WILDLAND-URBAN INTERFACE FIRE AREA .... 110.10(b)1A
The Pennsylvania State University
Fundamentals of Building Construction Management by John I. Messner is
licensed under aCreative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike
4.0 International License, except where otherwise noted.
1. Introduction to the Building Industry 3
2. The Lifecycle of a Building Project 19
3. Project Participants and Roles 36
6. Rough Order of Magnitude (ROM) Cost 104
7. Modeled Square Foot (SF) Cost 115
9. Unit Price Cost Estimating 141
12. General Conditions and Project Staffing 170
13. Designing a Site Utilization Plan 178
17. Introduction to Project Management and 205
19. Cost and Financial Management 216
24. The Future of the Construction Industry 254
This book provides an overview of the building industry, the
projects performed within the industry, and methods to plan
and manage the delivery of a construction project. This book
is free. The content will continue to grow and mature. Please
share any errors or suggestions for improvement. Instead of
use your funds to support learning experiences, for example,
field trips to see construction projects or other educational
the proper Personal Protective Equipment (PPE) to be safe
when visiting and working on construction sites.
Charles & Elinor Matts Professor
Navigating this Book Online
After reading this chapter, you should be able to:
• Learn the Characteristics of the AEC Industry
• Understand the variety of projects performed
• Describe the scope and scale of the industry
industry is the 2nd largest industry in the United States
economy, 2nd only to the healthcare industry. Within the
United State market, the industry accounts for 6.1% (2016
4 | INTRODUCTION TO THE BUILDING INDUSTRY
data) of the annual Gross Domestic Product (GDP) of the
to work put into place along with employment (see sample
data from website image in Figure 1). Visit the link to see the
Figure 1-1: Construction Spending with Private and Public
One challenge when discussing our industry is to define
the scope and terminology used to describe the industry, or
in some cases, subsets of the industry. At a broad level, some
people refer to the industry as the Construction Industry,
(AEC) Industry, or even the Architecture / Engineering /
frequently use these terms interchangeably, and I will also do
INTRODUCTION TO THE BUILDING INDUSTRY | 5
the employees and tasks required to plan, design, construct,
operate, and manage the delivery and operations of the built
industrial facilities). It is important to note that when people
use the term ‘Construction Industry’, they are typically
referring to the design, construction, and operations of
facilities, not just the process to deliver a new facility. And
discussing all types of facilities, not just commercial and
if the owner is a private entity (an individual or company) vs.
a public (or government) entity. Another is to separate the
industry by the type of facilities that are constructed. In this
manner, we can separate the industry into four broad areas:
6 | INTRODUCTION TO THE BUILDING INDUSTRY
Buildings and enclosures that
contain a structure with enclosed
or monuments. Examples of buildings include office
by an architect. There may be many different types of owners.
facilities serve as core facilities that
serve the public, which are not
such as a civil engineer. New infrastructure projects typically
require a long planning and design phase.
house core industrial processes and
INTRODUCTION TO THE BUILDING INDUSTRY | 7
by specialty engineers in collaboration with civil
engineers. Most of these projects are privately funded. Many
of these projects are schedule-driven in order to start the
buildings are built to house
by an architect, or even a residential builder. While there are
large-scale residential developers, many residential buildings
have a lower cost and lower level of sophistication. But, there
Note that this is not a perfect set of categories since it is
components, but these categories do help us define the types
of players in each market, and the typical characteristics of
these different market sectors. Residential construction is a
unique sector of our industry, and the market conditions for
8 | INTRODUCTION TO THE BUILDING INDUSTRY
that are supported by construction. In the United States, in
2016 it was estimated that the Industry was employing 7.3
statistics (see Figure 3), the industry employs over 7.5 million
people. 14% of these jobs are current employees who are
members of a union, which is down from 17.5% in 2000,
although quite steady over the past 7 years. Note that these
employment figures do not include all professional service
employment related to the industry, nor do they include all
the manufacturing jobs related to building supplies or
transportation services for products to be shipped to the
INTRODUCTION TO THE BUILDING INDUSTRY | 9
the US Bureau of Labor Statistics (Source: https://www.bls.gov/
the construction industry can be significantly impacted by
economic recession in 2007 and 2008 had a very significant
impact on employment, going from approximately 7,600
10 | INTRODUCTION TO THE BUILDING INDUSTRY
employment fluctuation can be a significant challenge. Once
people leave the industry, it can be challenging to hire new
contractors right now is the lack of a skilled workforce. It
is interesting to note that the recent COVID-19 pandemic
has been the latest impact on employment in our industry.
abrupt, significant negative impact on employment, but that
trend that includes more recent data, although the time
note that the current employment (as of December 2021) is
almost the same as the employment prior to the COVID-19
INTRODUCTION TO THE BUILDING INDUSTRY | 11
Figure 1-3: Employment Trend for Construction
Employment from 1999-2019 (Source: US Bureau of Labor
Figure 1-4: Employment Trend for Construction
Employment from 1985 to 2022 (Source: US Bureau of Labor
While the size and scale of the industry are impressive, this
can also have significant negative impacts on environmental
files/climate.pdf). The construction of the built environment
can also add to the noise, light, water, air quality, and other
pollutants. These negative impacts can be substantial, and
to focus on minimizing the negative environmental impacts
of our industry. There are increasing efforts to address these
impacts through increased awareness along with metric
systems that provide recognition, and sometimes stipulations
through zoning regulations and code requirements, for
improved sustainability measures. Examples of these metric
systems include the US Green Building Council’s LEED
Building Initiative’s Green Globes certification, the Living
Building Challenge by the International Living Futures
12 | INTRODUCTION TO THE BUILDING INDUSTRY
Institute, and Building Research Establishment
Each year, Engineering News Record (ENR) performs a
One of the reports that they perform is the Top 400
Contractors list. It is important to note that this list is
compiled from company self-reported data, not audited
financial statements, and the rankings within the list are
specific to revenue, which is the value of the revenue that the
company receives for annual work performed. For large
construction management firms, much of the revenue that
But this data does show some interesting information. Figure
1-4 shows the breakdown of the revenue by ENR’s project
categories. This shows that in 2017, 53% of the revenue from
the Top 400 contractors was from Buildings. It also shows
that the second-largest category is Transportation, but it is
note that the recent Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act
federal funding bill will significantly increase this funding for
INTRODUCTION TO THE BUILDING INDUSTRY | 13
14 | INTRODUCTION TO THE BUILDING INDUSTRY
Figure 1-5: Construction Spending Relative to GDP in the US
INTRODUCTION TO THE BUILDING INDUSTRY | 15
Professional Engineering Licensure plays an
important role to ensure that engineers who
develop designs and manage the processes to
bring them into reality are competent and
qualified. Architectural Engineering and Civil
Engineering students who complete their
degrees should strongly consider a pathway
toward becoming a licensed Professional
required to perform certain work tasks, e.g.,
structural plans must be verified by a PE for
submission for a building permit. A PE can also
be helpful to illustrate your capabilities when
applying for job opportunities or to show your
The National Council of Examiners for
Engineering and Surveying (NCEES) was
established to provide uniformity across states
individual states within the U.S. administer the
licensing process per their laws and rules, which
16 | INTRODUCTION TO THE BUILDING INDUSTRY
• Pass the Fundamentals of Engineering
ABET Accredited Engineering Degree
• Graduate from an ABET Accredited
• Gain four years of progressive experience
• Complete an application to qualify to take
the Principles and Practices Exam; and
• Pass the Principles and Practices Exam.
After you receive your PE in Pennsylvania, you
are required to obtain at least 24 hours of
to maintain your licensure status. Also note that
once a candidate has taken and passed the FE
At this point, it is up to the individual to apply
When you have graduated, go to the following
Professional Credential Services website and
follow the instructions on the webpage. The
INTRODUCTION TO THE BUILDING INDUSTRY | 17
progressive experience only starts following
For additional information, please see the
Webpage along with FE Exam study and
Licensure for Construction Engineers
18 | INTRODUCTION TO THE BUILDING INDUSTRY
An interactive H5P element has been
excluded from this version of the text. You
Go online to see the latest reported construction
market information from the US Census Bureau.
Using seasonally adjusted annual rates, answer the
b. How much has the market grown or declined in
c. What percentage of the market is public sector
After reading this chapter, you should be able to:
• Describe various unique aspects of a building
project in relation to the manufacturing
• Define the total cost of ownership, and the
impact of decision timing on overall lifecycle
skill set for everyone within the industry is the ability to
manage projects, whether you work in project development,
Projects are not unique to construction. For example, some
other industries are also very project-focused, e.g., aircraft,
Management Body of Knowledge Guide (PMBOK) has been
developed by the Project Management Institute (PMI) as a
general set of knowledge for managing a project. The core
management areas identified in PMBOK includes the
following (from PMBOK Guide and the Construction
• Project Resource Management, including Human
additional resources beyond the standard Human
Management (in Construction Extension, but should be
• Project Financial Management (in addition to cost) (in
The Process to Deliver a Facility
A building project is composed of processes. A process is ‘a
series of actions bringing about a result’ (PMBOK). Each
process is performed by a person or organization Generally,
there are two broad categories of processes: project
management processes and product-oriented processes
designed, constructed, and operated (see Figure 2-1). This
lifecycle, and the importance of taking a lifecycle perspective
on projects, has sometimes been referenced as a Cradle-To-
Grave perspective. From a lifecycle perspective, all materials
and systems should be evaluated relative to their value in
supporting the lifecycle goals of a building or facility.
Figure 2.1: Facility Lifecycle Phases
a reference to Cradle to Cradle (C2C). C2C emphasizes the
need to consider the reuse or recycling of products that are
used within the delivery of a building.
define the various tasks that need to be completed to deliver
and operate a facility. The process model is titled the
‘Integrated Building Process Model’ (IBPM). This model is
created using the IDEF0 process modeling approach. Each
‘process’ (a box) can be expanded into another more detailed
process map showing additional detail. The Level 1 process
map shows five main activities within the process:
Note that the Manage Facility process interacts with the
primary product-oriented process of the project lifecycle, but
Also, note that IDEF0 process mapping does not necessarily
and they may not be in the specific order in which they will
process maps are included in Figure 2-1. The more detailed
process maps for each of the 5 phases are included in Figure
phase. If you wish to see detailed information about any
process, you can reference the Integrated Building Process
to define their project needs, identify the general budget and
owner may employ the services of an architect, contract
developer, or other professional to help them define their
needs, and identify the resource requirements. The final
outcome of the planning phase is a ‘Program’, or in some
to identify, and sometimes purchase, a site for the facility.
Figure 2-2: Integrated Building Process Model (IBPM) – Level
Integrated Building Process Model, Penn State, University
Within the design phase, a designer will interpret the needs
of the owner into a design for the facility which is to a level
of detail that it can be built. The design phase is frequently
divided into three levels of design:
• Schematic Design (SD): Perform an evaluation of the
owner’s needs, and develop an initial design concept.
Typically, the industry has considered this level of design
• Design Development (DD):Expand the initial concept
to define the systems that will be used and general
materials. Typically, this has been considered
• Construction Documents (CD): Finalize the design
details to a level that they can be built. Complete all
design specifications and construction drawings.
The full scope of these design tasks will typically be defined
within the contract with the designer (or integrated team if
definitions of the scopes within these phases, you can view
Institute of Architects (AIA) within their AIA B101
Figure 2-3: Integrated Building Process Model (IBPM) – Plan
Building Process Model, Penn State, University Park PA)
Within the construction phase, a contractor will lead the
procurement of all the elements needed to build the facility,
including arranging for the elements to be transported to the
site. After arrival, the building component will be assembled
on-site and tested to ensure the appropriate level of quality.
The constructed facility will also require any inspections by
governing authorities to ensure that it is safe to use for its
intended purpose. For a building project, the primary
is issued by the local governing authority or code office, and
it certifies that the building complies with the codes and
requirements and that the owner can occupy the building.
Figure 2-5: Integrated Building Process Model (IBPM) –
Integrated Building Process Model, Penn State, University
longest phase within the facility lifecycle. In this phase, the
owner will use the facility for its intended purpose, and they
will need to operate and maintain the functionality of the
facility. In some research, up to 80% of the entire lifecycle
cost of a facility is spent in the operations phase. Activities
that occur within the phase include the maintenance of
equipment, the replacement of materials and equipment that
require replacement, and minor renovations to allow for
revisions of facility use. This phase is also sometimes referred
to as Facility Management (FM), and an owner may perform
the facility management services within their own internal
employees, or they may hire a 3rd party FM service provider.
Figure 2-6: Integrated Building Process Model (IBPM) –
Integrated Building Process Model, Penn State, University
In addition to the unique four phases, there is a need to
the lifecycle. These processes were defined within the IBPM
this is NOT a phase of a project, but instead tasks that are
performed throughout the lifecycle process.
Figure 2-7: Integrated Building Process Model (IBPM) –
Integrated Building Process Model, Penn State, University
characteristics that influence our management approaches.
• All projects are unique. Even if a project is a duplicate
design of another project, the project will be located on a
unique site, which includes unique constraints.
• Projects are performed outside, at least until an
enclosure is developed. This is different from
manufacturing which may occur within a controlled
the environmental conditions of the geographic location
• The Construction Industry has many companies. The
AGC states that there are over 650,000 companiesthat
employ workers within the construction industry. This
is a very large number of firms, and some of these
companies may only have one employee. But it is also
important to note that the largest contractors are quite
large, but it is still a fragmented industry with many
• There are many organizations that work together to
deliver a project. It is not uncommon to have more than
20 companies working on the construction of a project,
with workers in the field, and there are many other
companies involved in designing the facility, and
supplying materials and equipment to the project.
• Design and Construction companies do not tend to
perform much research and development. Due to the
lower profit margins in the industry, and a shorter-term
focus, most firms do not invest in research. There are
certainly exceptions, but as a percentage, the industry has
• The industry is impacted by geographic ties. Since
buildings are constructed in many different locations,
there are different code requirements in different
locations and different companies with employees and
experience in working in the local markets.
• The industry has a high rate of business failures. Due to
a large number of smaller firms, it is not uncommon for
• There is a low barrier to entering the construction
market. In fact, it is quite easy for an individual to open
a construction company. It may only require some
simple paperwork, or they may need to apply for a
• Organizations change from project to project. It is very
rare to have the same organizations work together on
multiple projects. This requires members in the
industry to specialize in working with new team
members since the mix of team members, including
designers and contractors, will change on each project.
• Construction is a hybrid industry. Some tasks are service
tasks, e.g., the design of a facility or managing the
delivery of a facility. Other tasks are closer to
manufacturing, with a focus on producing the facility.
Examples of these tasks include building the structure,
industry is a hybrid between a service and manufacturing
a project from a total cost of ownership (TCO) perspective,
which considers the costs, along with overall environmental
impact, of all phases of the project lifecycle. It is very
important to note that the vast majority of the decisions that
concept has been included in quite a few different diagrams.
Figure 2-8 is a simple representation that shows the
construction costs over time (dashed line) where the costs are
that it is much more difficult to influence costs as the project
design and construction continue. For example, in the early
costs, but after the design is developed and the materials are
ordered, then it can be very difficult to reduce overall costs,
the change. It is also interesting to consider the overall
facilities on organizations and society, and they show that the
societal impacts of facilities are significantly greater than the
initial cost of design and construction (see Figure 2-9).
Figure 2-8: Cost / Influence Curve (Source:
Fig. 2-9: Relative cost of Design and Construction compared
to Operations, Performance, and Social Impact (Source: Mark
An interactive H5P element has been
excluded from this version of the text. You
1. What are the four primary phases of the
2. As the project progresses through time, the
ability to influence the cost of the project
3. There are many different companies within
5. What are the three traditional levels of the
design completed within the design phase,
and what is the percentage of design
completion that is typical for each level?
After reading this chapter, you should be able to:
• Define the types of companies and
organizations that exist in the Construction
• Identify typical tasks and activities performed
by the different types of organizations
PROJECT PARTICIPANTS AND ROLES | 37
It takes many different organizations and individuals to
develop, design, build and operate a building project. This
chapter will focus on the different types of organizations and
the various roles that an organization may perform on a
Every building project has one or more owners. The owner
is the organization, or individual, who has legal title to the
building, and typically, the land upon which the building
occupies. There are many (many) different types of owners.
Some are individuals, e.g., it is typical for an individual or
multiple individuals to own a single-family detached
residential house. In other instances the owner may be a
construction but intends to sell the building and property
possibly earlier), sells the building to a separate company that
will own and operate the building. These speculative
38 | PROJECT PARTICIPANTS AND ROLES
developers take on the risk of delivering the project, but they
they sell the property for a profit. Other projects are owned
or local owners, or even international government entities.
Examples of public owners include the General Services
Administration (GSA), the different branches of the military,
the Department of Veterans Affairs, the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, the State College Borough, the State College
Area School District, and the Pennsylvania Department of
Many of our core facilities that form that support the
airports, parks, and dams are owned by a public owner. It
is interesting to note that there has been an acceleration of
more collaborative public projects through Public-Private
Partnerships (P3). Through a Public-Private Partnership, the
government may provide some long-term concessions, or
payment guarantees, to a private sector partner, and then the
private sector partner develops and frequently operates and
maintains the project. An example is the Dulles Greenway
project in Leesburg, VA. For this project, a private company
Dulles Airport to Leesburg, VA. The organization was
provided a 37 1/2 year concession from the Virginia
Department of Transportation to allow the private company
to collect a toll from each vehicle that used the road. After
PROJECT PARTICIPANTS AND ROLES | 39
37 1/2 years, the road ownership will revert to the Virginia
Department of Transportation. The owner was able to
leverage the future toll revenue stream to raise the funds
needed to construct the project. This specific type of Public-
Private Partnership has also been r referred to as a Build-
Operate-Transfer (BOT) project. This approach can be used
for schools (guaranteed payment per student per year) or
correctional facilities (guaranteed payment per inmate). In
include providing all services, e.g., a prison operator may
Some projects have a separate 3rd party developer who is not
the owner. A contracted developer can help an owner by
guiding them through the delivery process and helping to
perform tasks that are the responsibility of an owner.
will pay for the facility, and they are the entity that defines
participants on the project. It is critical that core services
providers spend time understanding the core business and
values of the owner so that they can provide high-quality
residential projects, have many different companies that are
40 | PROJECT PARTICIPANTS AND ROLES
may be very targeted, with a strong specialty in a very specific
area. Examples include a specialty lighting design firm that
some architectural firms will perform architectural design,
mechanical system design, electrical system design, structural
design, and site design. Some contractors will manage the
delivery of the entire project along with performing concrete
construction, framing, and other specific trades on a project.
These companies that can perform many different roles on a
project do not fit into one specific category of company.
Overall, everyone who performs services for an owner are
service providers (and in some people’s terminology
‘contractors’ since they are contracted to perform work for
the later sections will divide the different roles performed by
companies into the following categories: Designers, Design
There is typically a lead designer(s) on a project who takes
responsible charge of delivering a comprehensive, integrated
PROJECT PARTICIPANTS AND ROLES | 41
design for the project. On commercial building projects, this
company is typically an Architectural firm, but on industrial
firm. The designer typically engages in a contractual
relationship directly with the owner, and their responsibility
is to manage and produce the design documents within the
design phase of a project. Some design firms are quite
specialized, e.g., a residential architect who focuses only on
single-family houses. Other design firms may be very diverse
and operate in many different market sectors, e.g., offices,
hospitals, hospitality, and correctional facilities. Design firms
specialize in the codes and construction methods within that
market, and they will also build relationships with the local
can be helpful when aiming to gain fast approval of designs.
may have multiple offices either within one country or
internationally. These companies may form a joint venture
to ensure that there is local representation on the project.
Finally, some designers work on very specific scopes of work
within the design process, e.g., architectural design or early
schematic design, while others may perform many different
scopes of work within their organization, e.g., architecture,
42 | PROJECT PARTICIPANTS AND ROLES
firms to perform targeted scopes of design work. These may
include scopes such as structural design, lighting design,
mechanical system design, electrical design, landscape design,
or other specialty areas. Design consultants are typically
smaller firms with a specialty in an area, although there are
certainly several large design consulting firms. Many students
within the structural, mechanical, and lighting / electrical
options within Architectural Engineering will work for these
design consulting firms, as well as possibly working for more
The prime contractor(s) focus on the management of the
delivery approach (discussed in the next chapter) and upon
the scope of work that they self-perform with their own
workforce. For example, if they simply manage the
PROJECT PARTICIPANTS AND ROLES | 43
construction activities performed by others, they may be
referenced as a Construction Management firm. If they are
self-performing work, along with coordinating the work of
Overall, the services performed by a prime contractor vary
Similar to design firms, there are many different types of
very large portion of the work.
One distinguishing characteristic of the prime
contractor(s) is that they hold a direct contract with the
A Specialty Contractor performs a specific scope(s) of
construction within the project. Examples of specialty
contractors are concrete contractors, mechanical contractors,
electrical contractors, etc. The companies typically focus on
self-performing (with their own labor force) the work for a
single trade, or sometimes multiple trades. Specialty
44 | PROJECT PARTICIPANTS AND ROLES
contractors will be responsible for purchasing the materials,
procuring the equipment, installing, and testing the
construction activities for their scope of work. Specialty
contractors can be a great source of knowledge within a
specific trade or system. They accept a fair amount of risk
since they are financially responsible to put their work into
place, and they may be able to get a good profit margin if
successful, but also may lose a fair amount of money when
things do not go as planned. On some projects, you will hear
‘trade contractors’. Their contract is typically with the lead
contractor for the project (which is why they are sometimes
to recognize their specialty area by referencing them as
project. Examples include concrete suppliers, lumber
equipment manufacturers, excavation equipment rental
companies, etc. Some of these vendors and suppliers are very
large, and others may be smaller, local vendors. The key
difference between a vendor or a supplier, as compared to a
specialty contractor, is that they do not have a workforce
PROJECT PARTICIPANTS AND ROLES | 45
located on the construction site. Instead, they may
manufacture or purchase items, and then deliver them to the
site for others to use or install.
It is very important to realize that companies can perform
many roles on a project, so it is quite difficult to define the
specific company type for some organizations. For example,
some companies perform both design and construction
services, such as integrated design-build firms. Some
developers will both owner properties and develop them as
contracted developer. Some industrial contractors will
perform all engineering services on a project, procure all the
material (and maybe even own several supply chains such as
piping) and perform the fabrication and assembly. The
into many different roles. In the next chapter, we will discuss
typical project delivery methods used on projects.
the delivery of a project. Projects must always interface with
the local government authorities, including the code office,
will also have insurance, and potentially bonding, companies
involved. And most projects have some financial agencies
46 | PROJECT PARTICIPANTS AND ROLES
An interactive H5P element has been
excluded from this version of the text. You
After reading this chapter, you should be able to:
• Understand the different aspects included in
typical project delivery methods
• Define the impact of various organizational
• Describe the different payment methods for
• Explain the types of award methods for
• Draw an organizational chart for multiple
Project owners use many different approaches to procure the
services needed to design and build a facility. Some facilities
are quite easy to build, relatively speaking, such asa simple
an owner to simply hire one entity to both design and build
their building. Others are very complex facilities, such as a
engage many organizations. But no matter how complex, the
that they need to deliver their facility. These decisions can be
developed into an overall Project Delivery approach.
It is important to note that prior to developing the overall
project delivery strategy, an owner must clearly define the
scope boundaries of a project. For example, sometimes an
owner will seek to build multiple buildings on a large parcel.
If so, then the owner will need to decide whether to make
a single project. For office buildings, the owner may need to
decide whether to have the core and shell be one project, and
the tenant fit-out is a second project or multiple additional
projects. These decisions define the extent of the project
Several core project delivery decisions that will influence the
The project organizational structure focuses on the approach
sign separate contracts (or agreements) with a Designer and
a General Contractor. Each contract will clearly define the
scope of services to be performed by each entity. The 7
organizational structures that may be used include:
• Design-Bid-Build with a GC(also known as Traditional
• Design-Bid-Build with multiple prime contractors
• CM Agent with multiple prime contractors
Design – Bid – Build with a General
with a General Contractor (DBB with GC) remains quite
design firm (typically an Architect for a commercial building
project). The designer will fully develop the design
documents, through the completion of the Construction
release the documents for the bid for a single organization
project. The potential general contractors will provide a bid
to the owner. Typically, the owner will then select the lowest
bidder, although they may use a different award method (see
building. A diagram showing the project organizational
shows solid lines for contracts. It includes a dashed line
between the design and contractor to illustrate the influence
contracts. For example, the architect will typically review the
constructor’s payment request prior to payment. The
architect will also typically review the completed work of the
constructor to ensure that it meets the defined quality in the
over the GC, but the Architect will not hold any contract
on the project since claims will typically only follow contract
Figure 1: Design – Bid – Build with General Contractor
The DBB with General Contractor (GC) approach is a
by many in the public sector as an approach to provide fair
and a clear selection criterion (low bid) when delivered with
a competitive bid award method. There are also many other
entities that use this approach.
Some benefits of DBB with GC are:
• The GC knows the full scope of the project, as defined
in the construction documents, prior to providing a bid
• The Owner can select a design firm independent of their
• The Owner has clear criteria to select the constructor
(low bid) since the Design-Bid-Build approach almost
always aligns with a low bid selection process. The
bidders may need to prequalify to bid on the project.
• The Owner may get a lower price if the scope is well
defined and there is strong competition for bidding on
But there are some significant challenges with this approach.
• There is no opportunity for a contractor to provide
input into the design process, which can limit the
potential for gaining early cost estimates,
constructability feedback, and feedback to improve
• It is not always clear that the low bidder will yield the
lowest final cost since there tend to be higher rates of
change orders given this approach.
• This is a slow delivery approach since the design must be
100% complete prior to putting the documents out to
Design – Bid – Build with Multiple
the scope of work into multiple trade or scope packages, and
then independently bid each package. This yields a similar
structure to DBB with GC, but instead of a single GC, there
are multiple trade contractors (see Figure 2). This approach
carries many of the same advantages and disadvantages as the
DBB with GC. One envisioned additional advantage of this
approach is that the Owner will not pay overhead costs for a
GC to manage the other prime trade contractors. But, one
additional disadvantage is that the Owner will now take on
additional responsibility in the management of the various
administrative effort for the Owner. For less experienced
owners, this additional burden can be quite challenging.
Figure 2: Design – Bid – Build with Multiple Prime
Note that this delivery approach is sometimes required by
public procurement regulations in a small number of public
Multiple Prime is the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. For
state-funded projects in Pennsylvania, there is a minimum
requirement per theSeparations Act, 71 P.S. §1618 that the
owner use a multiple-prime delivery system with each prime
projects funded by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania that
must be delivered with this approach.
The Design-Bid-Build delivery approach requires significant
interactions by the owner of the project during the delivery
effectively, some owners will deliver a project with a
Construction Management Agency. This CM Agent will be
a paid entity that helps an owner perform their required
activities in the delivery process, including the oversight of
overseeing overall project safety and quality, providing
tasks. This CM Agent arrangement is particularly valuable
for complex projects, or for projects that have an owner who
Figure 3: Construction Management (CM) Agent with a
The CM Agent will review the operations of the General
Contractor (GC), and report important information to the
Owner. It is important to note that the CM Agent has no
direct contract with the General Contractor. This limits the
liability and responsibility between the General Contractor
and CM Agent. If the GC were to file a claim, they would
need to do so with the Owner, since claims will follow the
contractual relationships. In some instances, the CM Agent
competitor will be overseeing another market competitor,
with Multiple Prime Contractors
This approach places a CM Agent into the organizational
can be quite helpful in assisting with some of the challenges
inherent in the DBB with Multiple Primes. For example, the
throughout the design phases. The CM Agent can also
organize and prepare the different bid documents to hire
multiple trade contractors. Finally, the CM Agent can
supplement the owner’s resources to coordinate the
method to use when there are procurement regulations that
require DBB with Multiple Prime Contractors.
Figure 4: Construction Manager (CM) Agent with Multiple
Construction Management at Risk is an approach where the
owner will hire a designer to develop the facility design, and
sometimes, usually early in the design process, they will hire
a construction management company to perform both
construction services during design along with managing the
provide during design will include reviewing the design for
constructability, developing bid packages for the hiring of
trades, identifying and prequalifying trades, and performing
for the project. This is frequently performed through a Cost
+ Fee with a Guaranteed Maximum Price (GMP) contract,
but it could also be through a lump sum contract (see details
later in this chapter). The CM is at risk since they directly
CM Agency where the Owner holds the contracts with the
trade contractors. A CM at Risk is a good delivery method
to allow an owner to hire a preferred designer, still have some
checks and balances in the system, yet also gain benefits from
early constructor involvement. This approach allows for
collaboration between the design and CM, although this
collaboration is not always as close as some of the more
Figure 5: Construction Management (CM) at Risk (Project
This delivery method may also be referenced by different
both the design and construction of a project. Within the
developing a program for the project. The program will
outline the requirements for the project, e.g., space
entity will then perform the design of the facility and be
A core and unique aspect of design-build is the single
design-build entity will be a legal entity but could take many
build company, or a single-purpose joint venture developed
between a design firm and a construction firm to pursue a
project. In many instances, the design-build entity is a
construction company, which then subcontracts the design
tasks to a designer. Or in some cases, the design-build entity
This single entity approach for both design and construction
allows for many potential benefits. It allows for a very tight
integration of construction means and methods with the
design of the facility. It also allows the team to develop
accurate cost estimates throughout the early design phases,
While there are many benefits to the integration that can
aspects. A primary concern that may be expressed within
design-build is that the owner may not have an independent
advocate within the checks and balances of having both a
design and construction contract. In a more traditional
approach, the design firm frequently has some oversight role
of the contractor, and the contractor has an opportunity to
share their opinions regarding the designer with the owner.
In a design-build project, the owner does not have a second
opinion in the same manner, and therefore, may not receive
the same feedback. The owner may also have concerns that
the design-build firm is trying to maximize its success to the
detriment of the project. While these are valid concerns that
must be appropriately managed through project control
systems and hiring a high-quality team, many owners find
design-build to be a very effective method to deliver a project.
where the entire team is engaged in the successful delivery of
Projects delivered using the Integrated Project Delivery
organizational structure have core members enter into an
Integrated Form of Agreement (IFoA). This IFoA is a single
contract for the project that is signed by all core team
that is unlike other delivery methods. Typically, all core
members will share the risks of designing and delivering the
project, along with the potential financial rewards if the
project is delivered on or below the target budget while
meeting the other project goals.
Figure 7: Integrated Project Delivery (IPD) (Project
There are typically many unique management aspects
will frequently form a cluster group at the beginning of the
to a common location to better integrate the design and
construction team members. During design, the team will
frequently use target value design approaches to ensure that
they are designing the project to budget. They will also
These different systems will be discussed in more detail in a
is included in Integrated Project Delivery: A Guide by AIA
There are many items covered within a contract. One of the
approach is the payment terms, which define how payments
include lump sum, cost plus a fee, cost plus a fee with a
Guaranteed Maximum Price (GMP), or unit cost.
In a lump sum payment approach, the owner will pay a fixed
amount to the contractor for the work performed. This
the prime contractor(s), a Lump Sum arrangement typically
corresponds with a traditional, design-bid-build delivery
approach, although it can be used with other organizational
either make a profit, if they can construct the building for
less than the lump sum value, or they will lose money if they
can not construct the building for the value. This transfers
a significant amount of the risk for financial performance to
the constructor. If the contract scope is changed or there are
errors in the construction documents that increase the cost
of construction, the constructor can file for a change order
to increase the lump sum value. A lump sum payment
arrangement may also be referenced as a stipulated sum
arrangement. It is also important to note that many owner-
designer contracts have a stipulated sum (or lump sum)
amount. This value may be estimated as a percentage of the
total project costs, but the value is frequently incorporated
have additional compensation amounts, e.g., reimbursement
for travel to the site or meetings.
The Cost Plus a Fee approach leaves the final contract value
open. It is a contractual arrangement where the owner (or a
fee or it may be a percentage of the cost of work. A Cost
Plus a Fee arrangement is typical for projects where the full
scope is not well defined, and the owner wishes to start the
work. This contracting method carries a significantly lower
risk to the contractor. The contractor will need to account
for all of their costs, and share these details with the owner.
This approach is frequently referred to as Open Book since
Cost + Fee with Guaranteed
many Owner – Construction Manager (or some others)
contracts have a Cost + Fee with GMP. In this approach,
an owner will pay all the costs of work along with a fee to a
of the GMP, then they will only receive the GMP value. If
they spend less than the GMP value, then there are savings.
In other instances, all the savings may go to the owner. With
the Cost + Fee contract, the contractor will provide invoices
accounting for all the costs that they have incurred. This is
an Open Book approach since the owner can audit the
For some scopes of work, although not typically an entire
project, an owner or contractor will pay a supplier or
subcontractor a unit price amount for a scope of work. For
example, the contractor may pay for concrete by a cubic yard
of a specific mix design, or an excavation subcontractor may
be paid by the cubic yard of excavated material. A benefit of
with a clear cost per unit, while not necessarily knowing the
When one party would like to hire another party to perform
a service or provide a product, the party must decide how
they will select the other party. There are many different
the contract. For design and construction contracts, these
methods can be broadly categorized into a) competitive bid,
One traditional method to select a contractor is to select the
lowest cost contractor in a competitively bid arrangement.
In this approach, all contractors will submit a bid, and the
Owner, or selecting entity, will review the bids and select the
used for public projects, along with many private projects.
One challenge of an open competitive bid is that the owner
but that the owner does not feel has more advanced
a 2 step process. They will first prequalify a subset of the
potential bidders, through the review of a qualification
of the prequalified bidders to submit a bid for the cost of the
project, and they will select the lowest cost bidder from the
Another approach to selecting a contractor is to develop a
best-value selection process. In this approach, the owner will
identify the criteria that they value, and develop an approach
to weigh each of the criteria. These criteria may include the
quality of the team, experience on a similar project, plan for
approaching the project, and other criteria. They will also
include cost as a factor, but not as the only selection factor.
Once these criteria are identified, then the owner will review
the submissions from potential contractors and rate each of
the cost. The selection will occur based upon the contractor
who rates the highest in the combined weighted equation.
This approach can yield the selection of a contractor who
aligns more closely with the values of the project.
A final approach to selecting a contractor is to identify an
entity (or entities) that you would like to hire, and then
directly negotiate a mutually acceptable agreement with the
entity. This has the benefit of being able to select the entity
directly, but this may not be allowed in many public
It is very common to draw a project organizational chart
(sometimes simply called an ‘org’ chart) that identifies all
primary parties on a project. These charts also show the
contractual relationships between the parties, indicated by
lines in the diagram. Note that project organizational charts
focus on the relationships between the organizations on the
project, unlike an organizational chart for personnel within a
Project organizational charts can sometimes be quite
graphic, with companies using their logos or other symbols,
or they may simply show the entities and their relationships.
In the examples that follow,we will keep the project
organizational charts simple, and simply show the core
attributes of the delivery strategy. Figure 9 shows a relatively
simple sample organizational chart for a design-bid-build
structure. Figure 10 includes a more comprehensive
more trade contractors and more design consultants. Also,
note that each sample has a legend that you would want to
include with an organizational chart. In addition to showing
These are not included in the samples below.
Figure 9: Sample project organizational chart showing the
owner at the top with several specific firms as the designer,
general contractor, and other designers and trade
Figure 10: Sample project organizational chart with different
format to show a larger number of design consultants and
When drawing a project organizational chart, it is typical to
have the owner at the top of the chart. The owner initiates
all of the prime contracts on the project. By saying ‘prime’
the owner. As we proceed vertically through the project
organizational chart, the levels of contracts are sometimes
example, a party that contracts with a prime contractor is
not often) a first-tier subcontractor. This means that the
subcontracted party has a direct contract with a prime
contract with a trade contractor, they may be referred to as
contract with a general contractor as a prime contractor.
Then, the general contractor may contract with a mechanical
specialty trade contractor via a subcontract. The mechanical
trade would be a subcontractor. The mechanical specialty
be a second-tier subcontractor. The sample project
subcontractor parties, they do not include any second-tier
Payments, roles, and responsibilities follow these contract
lines. In the above example, the owner would pay the prime
contractor, the prime constructor will then pay the
subcontractors, and the subcontractors will then pay the
It is helpful to use a graphics program when developing a
application. You can either download the application locally
or you can use a browser-based version of the application at
chapter can be downloaded as a template document at this
to select the appropriate organizational structure and modify
the template organizational chart as needed.
the project delivery methods area. The following items
focused on partnering and fast-tracking are NOT project
delivery methods, but instead, they are related to the delivery
of projects and the relationships of the project team members.
The Construction Industry Institute (CII) (1996) defined
partnering as “a long-term commitment between two or
more organizations as in an alliance or it may be applied to a
shorter period of time such as the duration of a project. The
by maximizing the effectiveness of each participant’s
“construction partnering as a structured process that brings a
design and construction team together regularlythroughout
the life of a project. Partnering provides a space
The partnering process, which may be contractual or non-
contractual, puts in place a series of collaboration approaches
aimed at improving the relationships between project
participants, regardless of the formal delivery method used.
• Partnering Specification: To guide the partnering
process and balance the power of everyone in the room
• Charter: Co-created by the team in kick-off session(s) to
establish goals and strategies to meet the goals
• Issue Resolution Process: To define an approach to the
• Anonymous Surveys: To collect feedback on progress
• Follow-up Sessions: To update goals, and identify and
resolve issues, held at least quarterly
• Lessons Learned Session(s): To capture and learn from
• A neutral professional facilitator: To guide the team
through the partnering process
Fig. 11: The Collaborative Partnering Process (Source:IPA
Partnering can be implemented across all delivery methods.
Partnering has been shown to aid in timely issue resolution
and improved schedule, cost, and quality. It can help the
Simply put, fast-tracking is the overlapping of the design and
the construction process. If a project is fast-tracked, then the
constructors will start to build some portions of the project,
structural elements while the designers continue to develop
the more detailed design. This fast-tracking will reduce the
overall schedule, but it must be managed well to reduce the
risks associated with building portions of the project prior
to design completion. Fast-tracking can be achieved in many
different delivery methods provided the contractors are
to procuring a contractor. But, we can fast-track a project
using the CM-at-Risk, CM Agency, Design-Build, and IPD
that the CM procure the trades needed to complete the fast-
tracked work tasks prior to completion of design.
It is important to note that some people may use the
terminology of fast-track and design-build interchangeably,
but they are very different topics. Fast-tracking is focused on
the parallel scheduling of activities. Design-build is a project
methods. An initial study, performed by Konchar and
Sanvido (1995) focused on comparing three broad delivery
The study reviewed a significant amount of data related to
of the study clearly illustrated that Design-Build projects
outperformed other delivery methods when comparing cost,
schedule, and quality metrics. Specifically, the data indicated
completed 33% faster than DBB, and DB projects had a 10%
higher rating for quality than DBB (Konchar and Sanvido,
More recently, a new dataset of 212 U.S. projects was
this data was analyzed to evaluate relative cost, schedule, and
quality metrics based on the delivery method adopted for a
shown in Figure 12 (extracted from the study’s final report).
Note that the column titled ‘This Study’ is the data analyzed
data from 1998, with Design-Build generally outperforming
the CM at Risk, and CM at Risk outperforming the Design-
Fig. 12: Comparison of Performance Metrics by Delivery
Method – Comparing 1998 and 2018 Data (Source: Molenaar
In fact, the study was performed prior to the advent of the
more recent Integrated Project Delivery (IPD) approach. A
more recent study evaluated the different project delivery
attributes that influenced the overall project performance on
Overall, it is clear that well-managed projects that leverage
higher levels of integration of team members and budget
transparency can yield high levels of success.
Several guides and tools have been developed to assist owners
in the selection of delivery methods. One of the earliest tools
developed was the Project Delivery Selection System (PDSS)
by Vesay (1991). This simple decision matrix aimed to point
an owner to potential delivery approaches that may be most
appropriate for their project given a series of project
characteristics. In particular, Vesay developed a decision tree
using 6 project characteristics which include:
1. Scope Definition: Is the scope of the project clearly
2. Time Criticality: Is time critical to achieving project
3. Owner Experience Level: Is the owner experienced with
4. Team (or potential team) Experience Level: Is the team,
or the pool of potential team members, experienced with
5. Quality Level: Is the level of desired quality equivalent
to industry standards or above industry standards?
(Industry Standard (i.s.) or Above Industry Standards
6. Cost Criticality: Is the first cost of the facility critical to
the consideration of one or more potential delivery methods
and payment methods. Note that it may point to one
suggested method, multiple suggested methods, or suggest
that a characteristic be revised prior to proceeding, e.g., more
The decision trees from Vesay (1991) with some additional
revisions to include the IPD delivery method are shown in
These decision trees are simply meant to guide an owner.
Specific project characteristics may limit the potential
selection of methods (e.g., a procurement law or restriction).
Characteristics may also guide an owner to one method over
another, e.g., previous history with a successful team.
Figure 13: Project Delivery Selection System (PDSS) Decision
Figure 14: Project Delivery Selection System (PDSS)
A more recent study yielded the Maximizing Success in
This guide outlines additional items to consider when
selecting and managing the delivery of a project. This
document highlights the importance of three critical features
1. Early involvement:When possible, get the primary
builder, and if possible, the trade contractors involved
early in the project design phase;
employ some form of qualifications-based selection, not
contracting approach that provides cost transparency
between the owner and the prime constructor(s). This
would include payment methods such as cost plus fee or
cost plus fee with a guaranteed maximum price.
An interactive H5P element has been
excluded from this version of the text. You
Delivery Performance. Final Report, Charles Pankow
After reading this chapter, you should be able to:
• Define typical cost estimating methods that
are used within the Construction Industry
• Describe the types of cost information
available to various participants within the
• Describe relative levels of accuracy for
INTRODUCTION TO CONSTRUCTION COST ESTIMATING | 89
Construction cost estimating is both an art and a science.
To be an effective estimator, you need to be able to interpret
a facility design, and visualize and plan the approach toward
building the facility. The best estimators are also very good
the conditions that will add or reduce future costs.
Construction cost estimates (‘estimates’) are created at
many different points in time throughout a project. The
manager may develop a series of progressively detailed
estimates during the design process to ensure that the project
or trade contractor will develop estimates to determine their
Construction cost estimates are also developed to different
levels of detail, and different levels of accuracy. One method
of defining levels of detail is to follow the RS Means levels of
90 | INTRODUCTION TO CONSTRUCTION COST ESTIMATING
per unit or cost per square foot for a building. They are
projected to be accurate to within +/- 20%, although this
accuracy can be highly variable. This estimate can be
for an office building. This estimate can be performed in the
planning phase, and should only take approximately 10
Modeled Square Foot Estimate
to develop a building that is representative of the future
+/- 15%, but again, this can be very variable depending upon
the levels of assumptions. The Modeled Square Foot
estimating approach requires that you have an approximate
in the Schematic Design phase and will typically take
quantifying, and pricing each of the assemblies within a
INTRODUCTION TO CONSTRUCTION COST ESTIMATING | 91
level design and be able to perform quantity takeoffs for the
various systems. This typically can occur within the Design
on performing quantity takeoffs (quantifying the amount of
where you define each of the items contained within the
project, and price these items after defining the specific
construction methods that will be used to construct them.
This approach can be accurate to within +/- 5% of the cost,
although this depends on the complexity of the project. To
perform this type of estimate, the design must be quite
complete, so it is typically done near or at the end of the
construction documents phase. It can take up to 3 weeks to
perform a detailed estimate of all items in a building, with
a significant amount of time spent on performing quantity
There is a chapter in these notes devoted to each of these
To develop an estimate of the cost to construct a facility,
it is important to identify data sources that will be used for
They can be divided into the following categories:
92 | INTRODUCTION TO CONSTRUCTION COST ESTIMATING
can obtain actual price quotes and actual cost information
for some, or many, of the elements that will be included in
the estimate. For example, if you are going to subcontract
portions of the project, e.g., the concrete or steel trade, you
can request quotes from one or multiple potential trade
on the cost of specific materials and equipment. Finally, you
you will still need to develop estimates for how many hours
the work activities will take. If you can get firm quotes from
have a high degree of confidence in the actual costs for the
2. Historical Cost Data: Company Data
If you can not obtain actual cost quotations, or for work
activities that a contractor will directly perform, they can
if you are a concrete contractor and you are developing an
estimate for the concrete work on the concrete work on a
future office building, you can review the actual costs and
production rates from previous projects that your company
along with how the project team tracked their costs. If a
INTRODUCTION TO CONSTRUCTION COST ESTIMATING | 93
for similar future projects that are quite accurate.
there are organizations that collect cost data, and then report
this data through online databases or cost estimating guides/
books. These organizations are typically collecting data from
levels of detail, e.g., individual work activities, building
to keep in mind that the data in these cost guides/databases
are averaged data, and individual site conditions, project
complexity, and other factors may significantly impact
to find but are not as reliable as accurate, well-organized
The most broadly used data source for historical data is
the information from R.S. Means. R.S. Means has a series of
of detail (see Figure 5.1 for cover pages) For example, they
electrical. And they have some guides for specific purposes,
94 | INTRODUCTION TO CONSTRUCTION COST ESTIMATING
the labor used, e.g., the Open Shop cost guide for non-union
Figure 1: Cover Pages for R.S. Means Estimating Manuals
(for Penn State students, most manuals are available in the
of goods over time and seeing how the price changes from
INTRODUCTION TO CONSTRUCTION COST ESTIMATING | 95
one time period to another. The most typical measure in the
US for inflation is the Consumer Price Index (CPI), which
is calculated from a typical basket of goods that an average
cost escalations that occur, but these escalations are more
targeted toward the cost escalation of building materials and
to consider cost escalation by calculating the escalation of a
focused on construction. These include the Building Cost
Index (BCI) which contains typical products and labor for
building construction; the Construction Cost Index (CCI)
which is much broader to cover roads, bridges, and
infrastructure; and the Material Cost Index for building
When we perform cost estimates for building projects, we
will focus on using the BCI value since it is more targeted
to buildings. If you compare BCI values for two periods in
and MCI are all reported in the Engineering News Record
publication, which is published each week (see Figure 2).
Monthly and annual averages are also available on the ENR
website and are included in Figure 3.
96 | INTRODUCTION TO CONSTRUCTION COST ESTIMATING
Figure 2: Construction Economics Section from Engineering
INTRODUCTION TO CONSTRUCTION COST ESTIMATING | 97
Fig. 3: ENR’s Building Construction Cost (BCI) Index History
When using the RS Means data, it is valuable to know that
the data within a cost guide is updated to be consistent with
the index values for January of the year on the cover. For
Cost Guide, all cost data will be statistically modified to be
consistent with the January 2021 BCI.
If you are a private organization that maintains your own
cost data, you will also want to modify the data based upon
98 | INTRODUCTION TO CONSTRUCTION COST ESTIMATING
their own information to modify these costs. For example,
Turner Construction maintains, and even publishes, its own
cost index over time which isavailable online.
on average, construction costs have historically risen
approximately 3% per year. When we estimate future
construction costs, we need to consider the projected future
a projected escalation of 3% per year can be used for future
construction cost escalation. Companies will be reviewing
to establish the escalation values that they project when
developing their cost estimates. This can have a significant
impact on their final economic success on certain types of
projects, e.g., lump-sum contracts, especially for projects that
Modify Index Values for Location
Construction costs vary by geographic location to due
differences in material, equipment, and labor costs. These
variations can be significant.These cost variations can be
conditions (e.g., urban construction tends to cost more than
rural), availability of contractors, taxes, and overall region or
country economics. In the 2021 International Construction
Market Survey by Turner & Townsend, they found Tokyo,
Hong Kong, and San Francisco to be the 3 most expensive
INTRODUCTION TO CONSTRUCTION COST ESTIMATING | 99
cities in the world to build (see Figure 4 for the top 10 most
top 10 most expensive locations are major cities within the
Figure 4: Top 10 Most Expensive Places to Build (Source:
International Construction Market Report 2021 by Turner &
In the RS Means data, they develop all their data into a
national average for publishing, and then they publish
Location Factors for different cities. For example, a location
factor for Dickinson, North Dakota can be identified in the
Location Factor table which is included in the back of each
of the Gordian Guides with RS Means data (see Figure 5).
The national average is 1.0, and the commercial construction
100 | INTRODUCTION TO CONSTRUCTION COST ESTIMATING
is estimated from the guide to cost $100 million, then the
estimated cost in Dickinson would be $85 million. Gordian
publishes both residential and commercial location factors in
some tables. Note that the residential location factors are
targeted toward single-family detached residential, not
residential apartment buildings which would be considered
commercial construction. Some guides also publish specific
City Indexes which are more specific for altering the cost for
both time and location within a given city. RS Means
publishes city indexes for 20 large cities in the US.
Figure 5: Location Factor Table from Cost Estimating Manual
There are also international indexes that allow estimates to
be transitioned from one country to another, although this is
certainly not as accurate for many purposes.
One important aspect of cost estimating is to always
INTRODUCTION TO CONSTRUCTION COST ESTIMATING | 101
are developing an estimate for an owner, early in the project,
you will want to make sure that the owner is aware of the
potential variation, and that you clearly define what is
included in the estimate, and which items are not included.
For example, if you perform a Rough Order of Magnitude
estimate using RS Means, the estimate will include
cost, or extensive site work. These inclusions and exclusions
vary by the type of estimate performed.
RS Means data is collected from actual projects. This data
collection approach, and the statistics performed after
collection, can influence their ability to draw future
methods defined in RS Means approaches has some items
excluded. The following items are always excluded from RS
Means data estimates due to their high level of variability on
• Designer fee (not in ROM or Unit Cost – unless added)
102 | INTRODUCTION TO CONSTRUCTION COST ESTIMATING
• Contractor fee and home office overhead (not in Unit
• Contractor general requirements (not in Unit Price
1. List the four types of estimates, along with
2. Which of the following items are never
included in an RS Means cost guide (mark all
3. When modifying an estimate for time on a
highway project, you can use a ratio of the
time of cost data and the actual time for the
4. From the tables in this chapter, what was the
INTRODUCTION TO CONSTRUCTION COST ESTIMATING | 103
5. Based on the location factor data in Figure 4,
the cost for construction in Columbus Ohio is
higher than the average cost of construction
After reading this chapter, you should be able to:
time factors and location factors
• Identify the appropriate locations to find the
R.S. Means cost data tables used for ROM
ROUGH ORDER OF MAGNITUDE (ROM) COST ESTIMATING | 105
At the earliest stages of a project, an owner or developer will
seek a general cost estimate for a facility. At this early stage,
may only know general information about the use of the
statistical data from the cost of buildings of a similar type.
If a contractor builds a large quantity of a particular type of
Means, provide a method, based upon statistical averages and
simply based upon a future use or size projection.
The Rough Order of Magnitude (ROM) estimating
also be sometimes referred to as a ‘napkin’ estimate since you
could write it on a napkin while having lunch with a client.
for determining the overall economic feasibility of a project.
of quality that they may be able to develop for a given budget.
106 | ROUGH ORDER OF MAGNITUDE (ROM) COST ESTIMATING
The tables and information for performing a ROM estimate
with RS Means cost data are included in a section toward
the end of the Assemblies Estimating Guide. The title used
for these data tables within RS Means Guides is ‘Square Foot
Estimate’ which can be misleading since the values are
Square Foot Estimates that will be included in the next
chapter. The tables, simply several pages of data, provide
statistical average cost data for each type of facility with a
you can then develop an estimated cost per square foot for a
they are calculated is included in Figure 6-1 from the
ROUGH ORDER OF MAGNITUDE (ROM) COST ESTIMATING | 107
Figure 6-1: Description of the Rough Order of Magnitude
Estimating Approach with RS Means Data
To perform the estimate, you can either have an approximate
footprint or size (square foot) for the building, or you may
units, you can easily convert these units to an approximate
108 | ROUGH ORDER OF MAGNITUDE (ROM) COST ESTIMATING
Figure 6-2: Unit Gross Area Requirements – Space Planning
RS Means also publishes a table that includes the estimated
cost per square foot for many types of facilities. A sample is
shown in Figure 6-3. After defining the appropriate level of
quality, you can identify an approximate cost per square foot
for the building. Once you know the estimated square foot,
and an approximate square foot value, you will then be able
of the facility relative to the average facility size for the data
within RS Means. This Size Modifier is important since the
cost per unit (square foot) of a building will vary based upon
square foot than smaller buildings due to the crews learning
the construction methods and being more productive, along
with the ability to get lower material costs due to quantities
ROUGH ORDER OF MAGNITUDE (ROM) COST ESTIMATING | 109
and there is typically a lower amount of facade per floor area
which reduces costs. Due to all of these factors, the unit (per
square foot) cost for a larger building is lower, even though
Figure 6-3: Example of ROM Estimate Tables
type. This ratio of relative sizes can then be used within the
110 | ROUGH ORDER OF MAGNITUDE (ROM) COST ESTIMATING
Figure 6-4: Size Modifier Table for ROM
What is Included in the ROM
The ROM estimate is simply a statistically averaged cost with
some distributions for a particular type of building in the RS
Means’ dataset. The data is for the total construction cost.
Therefore, the ROM estimated value does NOT include the
designer fee for the project. It also excludes the typical items
ROUGH ORDER OF MAGNITUDE (ROM) COST ESTIMATING | 111
that are excluded from all RS Means cost data, e.g., land and
financing costs. It does include the contractor’s general
Please reference the course slides to see additional details
regarding the Rough Order of Magnitude estimating
Steps to Develop a Rough Order
The following are the steps to develop a ROM estimate by
using the Gardian estimating manual with the actual square
foot cost data from RS Means.
1. Identify the Project Size
As previously discussed, the project size may be determined
from an approximate building footprint if one exists, or you
Table in the Gardian manual (see Figure 6-2). This table
includes approximate sizes for different building types based
112 | ROUGH ORDER OF MAGNITUDE (ROM) COST ESTIMATING
2. Identify the Square Foot Unit Cost
6-3), identify the estimated cost per square foot for the
project. You can select the median costs, or the 1/4 or 3/4
cost values, based upon the projected level of quality for the
3. Modify the Cost per Square Foot to
Account for Project Size
to identify the cost multiplier. See Figure 6-4 and the
description earlier in this chapter for details regarding this
calculation. After identifying the Cost Modifier from the
graph, you will then calculate a modified cost per square foot
for the building by simply multiplying the Square Foot Unit
Cost from Step 2 by the Cost Modifier.
4. Calculate the Building Cost
The overall building cost estimate can be calculated by
multiplying the cost per square foot by the estimated square
foot quantity in Step 1. It is important to note that this
estimated value is for an average location in the United States
ROUGH ORDER OF MAGNITUDE (ROM) COST ESTIMATING | 113
5. Modify the Building Cost for Time
The estimated cost should be modified for the time of
construction and the location. This is performed by
calculating a time multiplier and a location multiplier.
Mathematically, it does not matter whether you modify for
multiplier can be found in Chapter 5 and in our class
There are many other items that you may include in the
ROM. The ROM calculation using the Gardian approach
does not include design fees, so if a design and construction
The estimate will also not include land and financing costs.
These could be added depending upon the purpose of the
114 | ROUGH ORDER OF MAGNITUDE (ROM) COST ESTIMATING
An interactive H5P element has been
excluded from this version of the text. You
After reading this chapter, you should be able to:
• Describe the benefits and limitations of the
Modeled Square Foot (SF) estimating
• Identify the appropriate locations to find the
R.S. Means cost data tables used for Modeled
116 | MODELED SQUARE FOOT (SF) COST ESTIMATING
As additional details are known about a building, a project
team can develop a Modeled Square Foot estimate based
upon previously composed model projects that have been
developed in the Gordian Guide for SF Estimating with RS
facade and structural system) to define an estimated cost per
square foot. Additions can then be included within the
The descriptions contained in Figures 1 and 2 show a
description of the content contained on the 2 pages for each
Guide. These descriptions are referenced from the beginning
of the estimating Guide. This Guide is simply composed of
a series of Square Foot pages per building type. The initial
individual assemblies included toward the end of the guide,
along with other tables and information.
MODELED SQUARE FOOT (SF) COST ESTIMATING | 117
Figure 1: Introduction of the Modeled Square Foot Estimating
Approach (Source: Gordian Square Foot Costs with RS Means
118 | MODELED SQUARE FOOT (SF) COST ESTIMATING
Figure 2: Continuation of Introduction of the Modeled Square
Foot Estimating Approach (Page 2 of each building) (Source:
Gordian Square Foot Costs with RS Means Data 2018)
the estimate, you will need to have as a minimum an
approximate footprint for the building, an understanding of
the type of structural system, a proposed facade type, and an
estimated floor to floor height. If you do not know any of
these items, you could still develop an estimate using various
the ROM Estimating approach described in the previous
MODELED SQUARE FOOT (SF) COST ESTIMATING | 119
detailed building assemblies, e.g., structural system elements,
mechanical system elements, etc., and building a ‘model’
estimate for a fictitious building that would be similar to the
facility type. RS Means leverages average assembly
components when designing these model buildings, but the
estimating sheets are not based upon an actual building. In
this way, they can build many modeled buildings making
of perimeter. The perimeter length is particularly important
in this form of estimating since larger amounts of perimeter
to be more expensive since the facade is an expensive element
building cost due to extra vertical elements (e.g., plumbing,
structure, elevator, etc.) along with larger amounts of the
In contrast, the Rough Order of Magnitude (ROM)
method presented in the previous chapter is based on the
building projects. The Reported Square Foot method that
we used for the ROM estimates simply uses average building
costs across the dataset. The average costs are not calculated
from any detailed characteristics or system types within the
be much more accurate than the previous ROM approach.
120 | MODELED SQUARE FOOT (SF) COST ESTIMATING
Figures 7-3 and 7-4 include a sample of the two pages for
one of the building types. In particular, these pages provide
a description of a 4-8 Story Hosptial. You will notice that
the building type has a reference number, which is M.340.
These reference numbers help RS Means keep track of the
data that they compile, and also allow users to refer back to
the assumed data. You will notice that almost all elements of
data reported in the Gordian guides (based upon RS Means
data) have some form of the reference number, whether it
Figure 7-3 is highlighting, in the Blue box, the base unit
(SF). Note that the base building cost is initially pulled from
the data table from the overall square footage of the entire
building. You do not want to select the base cost from the
linear feet of the perimeter, but instead, modify for the
perimeter of the building after you have identified the base
building cost from the square foot area. The table includes
various exterior wall types, and some buildings also include
alternative structural systems. In our example, if the hospital
cost for the building will be $273.80 per square foot. This
the perimeter with the average linear feet of the perimeter in
column). The cost would also need to be modified for story
MODELED SQUARE FOOT (SF) COST ESTIMATING | 121
provided within the Gardian guides, which is highlighted in
the yellow box. A step-by-step procedure for developing a SF
cost estimate is included in the next section.
Figure 3: Sample Hospital Project Square Foot Estimate
(Modified from Gordian Square Foot Costs with RS Means
122 | MODELED SQUARE FOOT (SF) COST ESTIMATING
Figure 4: Example Hospital Square Foot Cost – Page 2
(modified from Gordian Square Foot Costs with RS Means
It is important to note that the Modeled SF Estimating
MODELED SQUARE FOOT (SF) COST ESTIMATING | 123
highlighted model building), and it also includes the overall
contractor fees and architects fees. These are included at the
bottom of the 2nd page (see Figure 4). You can also modify
your estimate with common additions that are listed on the
first page of each of the modeled facilities (see Section 9 in
Figure 1). These common additions are included for each
1. Find the Correct (or closest) Model in
the Square Foot Estimating Manual
The Gordian Square Foot Estimating Manual contains many
different types of buildings, but certainly not all types of
or a mixed-use facility (e.g., 3 stories of parking, 2 stories of
retail, 5 stories of office, and 5 stories of a hotel), then you
Therefore, you may need to leverage several different model
types, and then average, or weighted average, the building
124 | MODELED SQUARE FOOT (SF) COST ESTIMATING
floor for the buildings, along with calculating the linear foot
of perimeter for a typical floor. In addition, you will need to
calculate the overall SF of the building, by adding up the SF
for each floor. If there are duplicate floor layouts, this can be
easily performed by multiplying the floor area by the number
the overall average estimated floor to floor height.
3. Identify the Cost per Square Foot for
By using the main table within the estimating manual (see
total SF to identify the unit cost. You will use the LF of
Perimeter in a later step. If the exact SF is not identified as a
higher SF cost columns to calculate the overall cost per SF.
4. Adjust the Cost per SF to consider
MODELED SQUARE FOOT (SF) COST ESTIMATING | 125
LF of Perimeter Wall and Story Height
After identifying a base cost per square foot, you can modify
amounts of the perimeter wall and the cost of additional (or
reduced) floor height. To adjust for the perimeter wall, you
will first identify the estimated quantity of LF given the
in Figure 3, if you have a building of 200,000 SF, you would
than 866, then the building will cost more per SF due to the
to the bottom row in the table. For our example, this shows
that there is an additional $1.60 per SF for every additional
100 LF of the perimeter. By using this ratio, you can easily
You will also need to adjust the cost per base SF by the
table, you will see that each additional 1′ of story height will
126 | MODELED SQUARE FOOT (SF) COST ESTIMATING
5. Calculate the Total Base Cost
After modifying the cost per SF for the perimeter and story
the cost per SF by the total SF for the building.
6. Calculate the Additional Basement
The cost per SF of the basement area is identified in the
estimating table, at the bottom of the table (see the yellow
box in Figure 3. To calculate the basement cost, multiply the
cost per SF of the basement area by the takeoff quantity for
7. Identify any Common Additions
On the first page for each model, there is a list of potential
These common additions can include items such as
MODELED SQUARE FOOT (SF) COST ESTIMATING | 127
8. Modify for Time and Location
You will need to modify the overall cost for both time and
location, similar to the previous methods. See the previous
for an estimating manual is taken as the January BCI or CCI
for the year on the cover of the manual.
Based upon the purpose of the estimate, you may add other
items to the estimated value. These could include an overall
land, excavation and sitework costs, permitting fees, and
that the fees for the contractor and the fees for the design are
in Figure 4). It may also be beneficial to present the number
to round the final number, at least to the closest $1,000
depending upon the value and audience. It can be confusing
it remains an approximate amount for the project.
128 | MODELED SQUARE FOOT (SF) COST ESTIMATING
An interactive H5P element has been
excluded from this version of the text. You
After reading this chapter, you should be able to:
• Describe the benefits and limitations of the
• Develop an assemblies estimate for a building
selecting various system options for a project
Once a project design progresses to a level where systems are
when the systems are being designed, although some systems
may be designed prior to this phase. These systems could
include items as simple as the number of lavatories or toilets.
as rooftop units. It is important to note that some of the
quantities used to develop the assemblies are straightforward,
such as number of units for the lavatories, although others
are more abstract, such as the square footage of the building
for the mechanical system. An estimating team within a
construction firm may have their own assemblies costs that
they have historically tracked and categorized. This chapter
Assemblies estimates for commercial building projects are
1 and 2) since they align with the overall building systems.
as substructure (A), shell (B), interiors (C), services (D),
equipment and furnishings (E), special construction and
Figure 2: Uniformat II – Element G for Building Sitework
To develop a full assemblies estimate for a project, an initial
takeoff of the quantities for each type of building system is
needed, along with an understanding of the type of building
directions regarding the information provided for each
assembly. Figures 3 and 4 contain the descriptions for the
categories within the Gordian Assemblies Guide with RS
Each assembly is defined within the Gordian guide with a
assembly (A1010) shown in Figure 4 is developed by
combining six more detailed items for a cast-in-place (C.I.P.)
foundation wall. These six items are shown in the System
These detailed items include formwork, reinforcing,
important to note that you can read more details about what
is included, and what is not included, in the description. For
not included in the foundation wall assembly. This assembly
will be estimated with the unit of ‘cost per linear foot’ of the
wall (see number 4 in Figure 4). It is important to note that
example is highlighted with its unique 12-character identifier
(see number 1 in Figure 3 for example and the reference in
number 2 in the same figure). For the remaining assemblies,
you may have access to this information if you use the online
Figure 3: Description of Gordian Assemblies Guide
information per Assembly (Source: Gordian Assemblies
Figure 4: Description of Gordian Assemblies Guide
information per Assembly (cont.) (Source: Gordian
Figure 5: Description of Steps to Complete an Assemblies
Estimate (Source: Gordian Assemblies Estimating Guide)
Figure 6: Example of an Assembly in the Assemblies
Estimate (Source: Gordian Assemblies Estimating Guide)
Figure 7: Summary of CSI MasterFormat Categories
An interactive H5P element has been
excluded from this version of the text. You
After reading this chapter, you should be able to:
• Describe the benefits and limitations of the
unit cost estimating approach
• Identify the detailed cost components within
a unit price estimate, and how these cost
As the detailed information is developed within the
142 | UNIT PRICE COST ESTIMATING
construction documents phase of a project, the project team
can develop detailed cost estimates using the Unit Price
estimating approach. The Unit Price estimating approach is
focused on identifying a cost for the materials, equipment,
Unit Price Estimating with R.S.
Means Data in the Gordian
Unit Price estimates for commercial building projects are
typically organized by the CSI MaterFormat categories (see
Fig. 9-1 for CSI MasterFormat 2016 Version categories). The
detailed CSI Materformat breakdown can be found at
data for identifying the cost for each of the items within the
estimate, but it is important to realize that construction
companies will frequently use their own historical cost
information for estimating each item. To be successful at
them in a database that can be easily searched and retrieved.
UNIT PRICE COST ESTIMATING | 143
If you do not have your own historical cost database, then
the next best approach is to use cost data contained within
published cost guides. For our estimating exercises, we will
be using the Gordian Construction Cost Estimating Guide
in this Guide are shown in Figures 2 and 3. To develop a
cost estimate for an item, you should first identify the unit
of measure for the item. Then, a detailed takeoff will be
performed to identify the quantity of the item within the
project. After performing the takeoff, the item can be
estimated. You’ll notice that the Guide provides a summary
for both ‘Bare Costs’ and ‘Total Including Overhead and
Profit’. The bare costs can be used in an estimate where the
estimator incorporates a separate, specific overhead estimate
After identifying and compiling quantity and cost data for
144 | UNIT PRICE COST ESTIMATING
the final estimate. An example of compiling the estimate is
Please reference the course slides to see additional details
regarding the Unit Price estimating approach.
Figure 2: Gordian Cost Estimating Guide Instruction (Source:
Gordian Construction Cost Estimating Guide)
UNIT PRICE COST ESTIMATING | 145
Figure 3: Gordian Cost Estimating Guide Instruction (cont.)
(Source: Gordian Construction Cost Estimating Guide)
146 | UNIT PRICE COST ESTIMATING
Figure 4: Unit Price – How They Work (Source: Gordian Unit
UNIT PRICE COST ESTIMATING | 147
Figure 5: Unit Price – How They Work (Cont) (Source:
Gordian Unit Price Estimating Guide 2018)
148 | UNIT PRICE COST ESTIMATING
Figure 6: Reinforcing Steel Weights and Measures (Source:
Gordian Unit Price Estimating Guide)
also presented, e.g., for Crew B-92, the cost per average labor
hour, including all equipment, overhead and profit, would
estimator wanted to estimate by a labor hour, for either the
UNIT PRICE COST ESTIMATING | 149
initial estimate or change order, they could use the cost per
Figure 7: Typical Crew Details for a Crew (Source: Gordian
Unit Price Estimating Guide 2018)
Additional Detailed Unit Price
Gordian guides with R.S. Means data are not the only
resources that can be used to develop detailed unit price
estimates. Many companies maintain a database of their own
150 | UNIT PRICE COST ESTIMATING
historical unit rates for common work tasks, and they will
leverage these historical costs during their estimating. They
to review specific actual costs from previous projects. This
is a very valuable approach to reviewing costs, but it is also
important to understand the context of the costs when
There are also several
have been developed for
commonly used guide for
This Manual, developed by Figure 8: Cover Page of the
NECA Manual of Labor Units
the level of difficulty of the work activities and provides a
different rate based upon normal installation, difficult
installation, and very difficult installation (see Figure 9 for
UNIT PRICE COST ESTIMATING | 151
has developed a Labor Factor Score Sheet (see Figure 10),
rated on a scale of 1 to 5 in order to develop an overall score
difficulty columns. The Manual includes a large number of
are for direct work, and do not include costs for supervision.
Figure 9: MLU Levels of Difficulty Definitions
152 | UNIT PRICE COST ESTIMATING
Figure 10: NECA Labor Factor Score Sheet
UNIT PRICE COST ESTIMATING | 153
Figure 11: Sample Page from the NECA Manual of Labor
Units for Section 8 of Division 26 Items
Note that there are other trades that have similar resources,
such as the online Mechanical Contractors of America
Association (MCAA) Web-based Labor Estimating Manual,
or the Sheet Metal and Air Conditioning Contractors’
more detailed guides to calculate labor hours, and then apply
multipliers to the labor hours based upon their perception of
the project conditions, e.g., if it is a project that may support
high levels of production due to prefabrication, good
planning, and detailed modeling, they may apply a multiplier
below 1.0, but if the project will be challenging, they may
154 | UNIT PRICE COST ESTIMATING
hours. These hours will then be combined with detailed
estimates of material, equipment, overhead and profit line
items to calculate the overall cost estimate.
An interactive H5P element has been
excluded from this version of the text. You
After reading this chapter, you should be able to:
• Describe how various trade contractor scopes
• Understand the concepts of ‘scope bust’ and
In earlier chapters, we have discussed the various delivery
methods used on projects. This chapter focuses on the
logistics of how an owner and the lead prime contractor(s)
proceed through the procurement (sometimes referred to as
purchasing) process. We will start with discussing how an
owner procures the lead prime contractor(s) for construction
scopes of work. This may vary based on the selected
build, CM at Risk, etc.). It will also change based upon the
selection approach (e.g., low cost, best value, negotiation).
In general, an owner must first identify and define the scope
of the work to be procured. If the project is delivered using
procuring the contractor(s). Regardless, the scope must be
defined to procure the entity(s) that will perform the
a proposal or bid for the project. Then the owner will most
likely prequalify the contractors. This may be a very simple
submit their qualifications for review and evaluation. For
example, at Penn State, some projects simply require that the
contractors are part of the approved bidder list, which is
relatively easy for a contractor to be accepted. Others may
are first downselected via a formal prequalification process
(through a Request for Qualification (RFQ)), and then a
detailed bid/proposal is submitted by the smaller number of
prequalified contractors. On larger projects, this downselect
may aim to reduce the number of bidders to approximately
Request for Qualifications (RFQ), followed by a Request for
For a contractor to submit a bid (or proposal) for a project,
compile them into their bid value (or budget value if it is
a Guaranteed Maximum Price payment method). When a
they will self-perform (if selected) and which portions of the
work they will subcontract to other companies. For example,
if a construction manager is putting together a proposal for a
the direct work. If it is a smaller building with a multi-trade
general contractor, they may choose to self-perform nearly
Once they decide the subcontracted work scope, they will
of work for each trade or subset of work that they plan to
subcontract. For a building project, these subcontractor
scopes of work are frequently defined by the scope of work
within a particular section within the project specifications.
For example, a construction manager may seek bids for the
structural concrete work (in CSI MasterFormat Division 03),
so the bid package may be defined by the scope of work for
Division 03, possibly with some exclusions and additions. If
the project specifications document is well defined, it makes
this task is more difficult since the contractor must be very
clear in developing the scope documentation for any
When developing the bid packages, the contractor must
make sure that they have each scope of work covered within
their pricing, but they should not include a scope of work in
two different bid packages. If a scope of work is not covered
at all, it is referenced as a ‘scope bust’, which means that the
scope of work is not included in any trade scope and is also
not planned to be self-performed. Eventually, someone will
need to perform this work and be paid for this work if the
contractor wins the contract. Therefore, this will cause them
to incur unanticipated costs and could cause them to be over
of work in two different bid packages. This would cause the
If they identify this redundancy, they can direct one trade to
not perform the work, and request a deductive change order
to the subcontract. When this occurs, it can be difficult for
the prime contractor to get 100% of the value back from the
subcontractor in the negotiations for the deductive change
After defining the scopes of subcontracted work into
documented bid packages, the prime contractor will solicit
bids from potential specialty trades (sometimes referred to as
a broad call for companies to bid on the specific scope. It
will typically take several weeks (2 or 3) on larger projects for
the specialty trades to compile and submit their bids to the
also be developing their own detailed estimate for their self-
trade scopes of work so that they have a comparison number
when they receive the bids from the trade contractors.
contractor must compile their overall cost estimate/proposal
prior to the deadline. If it is a competitive bid, the due date
and time are typically non-negotiable and all late bids will
typically not be accepted. This is particularly true in
not accept any late bids. When the prime contract compiles
their bids, they will obtain bids from each of the specialty
For some projects, the prime contractor may prefer to work
with a specific company for a specific scope of work, e.g., a
specific mechanical contractor. In these cases, the prime
contractor may simply negotiate a price with the preferred
submit their bid to the owner. Note that this is frequently
amounts along with alternative scope pricing.
Depending on the selection method, the prime contractor
will be selected either based upon the low cost only or based
upon the overall value, combining the cost and plus a
quantitative evaluation of the contractors qualifications.
Once selected, the owner will sign a contract with the
contractor, possibly after some negotiation of detailed terms,
terms with the trade contractors.
will aim to reduce the cost within a subcontract with the
specialty trade through negotiations with the trade following
the bidding process. Having discussions regarding costs is
relatively typical, but it is important to note that contractors
should not share the pricing information from one specialty
trade with another specialty trade in order to try to get them
to reduce their overall bid value. This is referred to as ‘bid
shopping’, and while it may not be illegal, it certainly can be
considered unethical. The prime contractor and potential
to an acceptable agreement. Examples of items that may be
to another (e.g., moving mason angle purchase from a mason
to steel fabricator scope), discussions of support resources
or discussions of schedule and other requirements that may
impact the work. Ideally, these would be discussed in the
An interactive H5P element has been
excluded from this version of the text. You
After reading this chapter, you should be able to:
• Define Value Engineering in the context of
• Understand the core characteristics of a
The key word in ‘value engineering’ is ‘value’. One common
Value Engineering (VE) is defined by the Office of
Management and Budget as ‘an organized effort directed at
No. A-131, 1993). In the Whole Building Design Guide,
Cullen (2016) defined Value Engineering as ‘a conscious and
explicit set of disciplined procedures designed to seek out
optimum value for both initial and long-term investment.’
There are several commonalities in these definitions,
• Life-cycle cost: A focus beyond just design and
• Value optimization: Seeking cost-effective solutions to
optimize the value to the owner
• Disciplined process: The team should apply a
conscious and disciplined process
within the definition of value engineering. Cullen (2016)
cutting exercise.’ This is very important to note since many
are simply trying to reduce cost and reduce value at the same
The Value Engineering Process
A key element of VE is to ensure that you follow a rigorous,
documented process. There is not one commonly accepted
standard process, but there are several documented process
descriptions that you can follow. One option is the process
A more concise process has been outlined by SAVE
International () in their Value Methodology Guide. This
Fig. 1: Depiction of VE Job Plan Phases
The VE Job Plan follows five key steps:
These five key steps are described as follows:
The outcome of the VE process should be monitored and
managed. One part of monitoring the process is to maintain
management tools have a location to manage and track VE
example setup with several simple sample proposals in Figure
Figure 2: Value Engineering Proposal Log Example
An interactive H5P element has been
excluded from this version of the text. You
Building Design Guide, National Institut of
Office of Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense.
After reading this chapter, you should be able to:
• Define the elements contained within general
• Understand the typical organizational
structure and job tasks of different
• Be able to define and draw a typical
organizational structure for a construction
firm, and understand how it differs from
GENERAL CONDITIONS AND PROJECT STAFFING | 171
When developing a detailed estimate of costs, the team needs
to plan for the project-related general conditions costs as well
as the home office overhead costs. These costs do not directly
the delivery of a project and ensure that the site is safe and
secure. General Conditions will vary on a project based upon
the size of the project, project complexity, site constraints,
duration of the project, cost of management staff, as well as
many other factors. These costs can be separated into the
(related to home office expenses). Gordian has developed a
checklist for the costs in each of these two categories (see
Figure 1 with project overhead on the left and home office
172 | GENERAL CONDITIONS AND PROJECT STAFFING
GENERAL CONDITIONS AND PROJECT STAFFING | 173
Figure 1: Gordian Construction Estimating Checklist for
Project and Main Office Overhead
The remainder of this chapter will focus on Direct Overhead
costs, which are specific to the project. These project-related
costs are typically referred to as the ‘general conditions’ costs.
General Conditions include the costs related to complying
with the General Requirements for a project which are
frequently outlined within a ‘General Requirements’ section
of a contract. The minimum General Requirements are
typically included in the Specification Section 01 within the
Technical Specifications and may also be defined within a
separate contract document. To identify a cost for many of
Section 01 within the Building Construction Cost Estimate
Guide with RS Means Data. Examples of items within the
division include project management time, field supervision
of a capital facility project. When we look at the tasks that
a number of core functions, with examples including
174 | GENERAL CONDITIONS AND PROJECT STAFFING
business development, and operations. These functions can
For smaller companies, a single person may perform multiple
companies, a function may be performed by a department
within the organization, or possibly even multiple
Figure : Typical Organizational Chart for Large Construction
GENERAL CONDITIONS AND PROJECT STAFFING | 175
Figure : Typical Organizational Chart for a Small Construction
for the planning and delivery of a facility as the ‘Operations’
function (or department) within the company. The
Operations group will typically have project executives, who
manage the overall delivery of a project, along with project
176 | GENERAL CONDITIONS AND PROJECT STAFFING
management staff who manage the delivery of the project on
a day-to-day basis, and the superintendent staff who develop
in the field to direct the work activities.
overall contract for the project. These staff members are
sometimes referred to as the ‘office staff’ from the perspective
of the management of the project. They tend to spend the
majority of their time in an office environment, frequently
in a jobsite trailer or office, working on management and
administrative tasks necessary to ensure that the field labor
and supervision are provided everything that they need to
efficiently perform the fieldwork. This includes tasks such as:
The Field Supervision staff is responsible for managing the
field operations along with ensuring that the field operations
have everything that they need to be successful. While
everyone on a project is responsible for safety, the field
supervision staff has an added role of ensuring that there is a
lead safety representative whenever there are field employees
performing construction activities on the site.
GENERAL CONDITIONS AND PROJECT STAFFING | 177
An interactive H5P element has been
excluded from this version of the text. You
After reading this chapter, you should be able to:
• Define the items needed in a site
• Understand the core concepts for
designing the site utilization plan for
• Be able to define and draw a site utilization
DESIGNING A SITE UTILIZATION PLAN | 179
A site utilization plan documents the designed status of a
defining the layout of a project site as it progresses through
the construction process. The site is continuously changing.
Therefore, there is no one representation that represents the
progression of the site throughout the construction process.
plans to define the progress of the site, for example, a site
The checklist included in Figure 1 provides typical items
that should be included in a Site Utilization Plan. Figure 2
shows a quality example of a site plan for a school project.
180 | DESIGNING A SITE UTILIZATION PLAN
Figure 1: Site Utilization Plan Checklist
DESIGNING A SITE UTILIZATION PLAN | 181
Figure 2: Sample Site Utilization Plan (Source: Massaro
182 | DESIGNING A SITE UTILIZATION PLAN
Method (CPM) schedule to develop a visualization model of
be fairly simple or very elaborate depending upon the level of
detail of both the 3D model and the detail contained within
while others contain temporary equipment, site elements,
formwork, etc. An example of a 4D model of the U.S. Bank
Stadium construction can be found atthis link.
DESIGNING A SITE UTILIZATION PLAN | 183
An interactive H5P element has been
excluded from this version of the text. You
After reading this chapter, you should be able to:
• Define the different types of schedules
that may be developed for managing the
activities and phases of a project
• Understand the purpose of various schedule
types and presentation approaches
• Understand the complexity and planning
effort required to develop different types of
The previous chapter defined 4D modeling as an approach
to visualize the changing conditions on a project site. A 4D
model can be a very valuable scheduling tool, both for
developing a schedule and visualizing/analyzing the schedule.
An interactive H5P element has been
excluded from this version of the text. You
After reading this chapter, you should be able to:
• Define the various terms used in the
critical path, total float, and free float.
• Develop a network diagram of a schedule and
calculate the start/finish times and float
• Identify the critical path activities within a
network diagram which includes float time
Network scheduling, sometimes referred to as Critical Path
• Precedence Diagram (also known as Activity on Node)
the end). The relationships are represented through nodes.
It is important to note that this representation is not
frequently used, and is included in this book simply to allow
everyone to understand the basics of the representation. We
will not use this approach in any calculation examples.
Figure 1: Network Diagram in Activity on Arrow Notation
Precedence diagrams are the most common notation used for
hand calculating a schedule, and can also be helpful in
visualizing the interactions between activities. In precedence
diagrams, each activity is represented as a box. In the most
duration, start and end times, or float. We’ll discuss these
items when we start calculating schedules. The boxes are
connected into the network using relationships which are
represented by arrows. Some activities have durations, and
others may be a milestone (an activity with no duration to
represent a specific point in time). This notation is also
are represented by nodes (boxes) and the relationships are
represented by arrows connecting the nodes.
Figure 2: Activity Network in Precedence Notation
In precedence and Gantt chart representations, there are the
• Standard Activity: Has a duration and represents a task
• Milestone Activity: Represents a point in time, with zero
duration. A milestone can be a start (with only a start
One of the first steps in developing a schedule is to clearly
milestones that are important to the project. For standard
activities, these could be items such as ‘place concrete in slab
3rd floor’, or ‘erect tower crane’. Note that activities should
always start with a verb (action) and include a clear element
and/or location for the action, e.g., a building component
(window), a location in the building or site, or a scope of
work, such as a scope of the design. Activities can also relate
to various design tasks such as ‘complete schematic design’,
project. They will not begin with a verb since it is defining a
and they typically show up in a graphical schedule as a
diamond with no duration. A milestone may be a start or
finish milestone. It will typically only carry one date within
the as-planned schedule, either a start date (for start
milestones) or a finish date (for finish milestones). Examples
of a start milestone may include ‘Design Begins’ or ‘Notice
to Proceed’ (the date a contractor can proceed with
construction). Examples of finish milestones include ‘Design
building can be used for its intended purpose) and ‘Final
Once the activities are defined, the relationships between
The finish-to-start relationship is the most common
relationship type within design and construction schedules.
This relationship simply states that one activity must be
completed prior to starting the second activity. There are
many examples of this type of relationship within building
projects, with some examples including ‘Place Wall Foooting’
Wall’. Examples during design could include ‘Complete
Additional examples along with a graphical representation
using activity on arrow, precedence diagram, and Gantt view
Figure 3: Finish to Start Relationship Definition and Graphical
Some scheduling examples simply list ‘predecessor’ activities,
e.g., see Figures 1 and 2. This implies that there is a Finish-
to-Start relationship between the predecessor activity and the
successor activity. In Figure 3, Activity A would be a
predecessor to Activity B. Or, another way to state the same
thing is that Activity B is a successor to Activity A.
Figure 4: Finish to Finish Relationship Definition and
Figure 5: Start to Start Relationship Definition and Graphical
The start-to-finish relationship is very rarely used during
used within a schedule to essentially fix the completion date
of one activity (B) to the start date of another activity (A).
Examples could include ‘Remove Trailer’ is finished when
‘Perform Landscaping’ is started, meaning that you are
the landscaping. Another example could be that ‘Cleanup
be cleaned up prior to removing the trash chute. Again, this
relationship type is very rarely used on projects. Graphical
representations using activity on arrow, precedence diagram,
and Gantt view are included in Figure 6.
Figure 6: Start to Finish Relationship Definition and Graphical
Calculating the Activity Durations
Each standard activity will have a duration with some time
unit (e.g., hours, days, weeks, etc.). For the purposes of this
unless otherwise noted. For some very time critical schedules
or more detailed schedules, planners may use hours or even
Team members can use many potential information
resources when determining the duration for a standard
activities. They may reference their previous project data to
identify the duration for some activities, e.g., the time to
receive a permit within a particular municipality or the time
to excavate a similar project. For more typical activities, it is
beneficial to be able to identify a production rate and scope
excavation for the building, you may measure the excavation
day can be used to define the overall activity duration, e.g., if
you can excavate 200 cy per day, then if you have 1,000 cy of
Duration = Total Activity Quantity / Quantity per Time
If you do not have historical data from previous projects
to rely upon, then the R.S. Means data within the Gordian
activity for one crew (see Figure 7). For example, if you have
cast-in-place 12″x12″ square columns, a Crew C-14A can put
0700 in Figure 7 – Crew in the column marked 5, unit of
measure in the column marked 8, and daily output in the
would not use labor hours in the schedule calculation unless
Figure 7: R.S. Means Data in Gordian Guide showing Daily
Output value in Column Marked with a 6
Calculating the Start and Finish
Once a network is developed, including all activities and the
relationships between activities, then the schedule times for
While this chapter has reviewed a detailed approach to
performed by using some form of computer software. Two
common software applications used in the industry for CMP
scheduling are Microsoft Project and Oracle Primavera P6
EPPM. In general, Microsoft Project is lower cost and easier
to learn, but has less functionality related to Primavera P6.
Microsoft Project is part of the Microsoft Office 365 suite
of tools, but it is not a typical application that many
It is fairly easy to use, with many people using the default
Gantt chart view to develop their schedule. There are many
tutorials available online to learn how to use MS Project.
Fig : Sample Microsoft Project – Gantt View
Fig : Sample CPM schedule in Primavera P6 EPPM shown in
the more advanced construction courses.
An interactive H5P element has been
excluded from this version of the text. You
After reading this chapter, you should be able to:
• Understand the concept and core definitions
related to risk management approaches for
• Identify the different types of risk
management instruments used to manage
that owners, designers, and constructors may
The Risk Management Process
Bonds and Their Application in
Insurance and Their Application
An interactive H5P element has been
excluded from this version of the text. You
After reading this chapter, you should be able to:
• Describe the many aspects of a project that
need to be managed to ensure a successful
• Define four management areas that are
frequently referenced as the Golden Triangle,
which require close management of
206 | INTRODUCTION TO PROJECT MANAGEMENT AND
The construction industry is a project-based industry where
a project can be defined as the lifecycle delivery of a capital
facility. It is critical for all participants on a project to be
may vary depending upon an organization’s role within the
would be a project manager who oversees the design process,
Within a construction company, they may define a project to
project manager assigned to the project. Regardless of the
set of items that are critical to successfully implementing a
Construction Projects are not the only types of projects.
There are many different industries that need to manage
projects. Examples include software companies that view
software products as projects. Or the shipbuilding industry
INTRODUCTION TO PROJECT MANAGEMENT AND
can be divided into a common set up project management
knowledge areas. The Project Management Institute (PMI)
is an industry association that has defined these knowledge
areas. PMI has created the Project Management Body of
Knowledge which defines the following core knowledge
They also added the following within a construction
addendum, although one could certainly argue that some of
these areas are common to other projects as well:
208 | INTRODUCTION TO PROJECT MANAGEMENT AND
cover multiple areas, e.g., cashflow analysis can be used for
both cost and schedule management.
on a project. Each of these areas has a planning, an
them. Within this course, we will specifically focus on four
managed, as defined in PMBOK. The four areas that will be
When we look at project success, Many people have defined
three of the four (Cost, Schedule and Quality) within the
context of the Iron Triangle. The International Project
Management Association (IPMA) states that project
INTRODUCTION TO PROJECT MANAGEMENT AND
in scope, time, cost and quality (IPMA 2006). Atkinson
can not maximize all three at the same time, within a defined
within the budget, time and quality constraints, but you can
not maximize all at the same time.
Fig. 17.1: The Iron Triangle (Source: Atkinson 1999)
Plan – Do – Check – Act Cycle
The Plan – Do – Check – Act (PDCA) Cycle is a
210 | INTRODUCTION TO PROJECT MANAGEMENT AND
straightforward approach for effectively managing and
controlling a process. PDCA has been discussed frequently
within the lean management community. PDCA is focused
A simple description of PDCA is included at
INTRODUCTION TO PROJECT MANAGEMENT AND CONTROL | 211
Within the PDCA Cycle, the planning is focused on
identifying problems and developing potential solutions,
for further analysis. Within ‘Check’, the data is evaluated to
of problem-solving throughout the organization, supported
The Project Control Process
212 | INTRODUCTION TO PROJECT MANAGEMENT AND CONTROL
Fig. 17-3: Project Control and Inhibiting Factors Management
Model (PCIM model) (Source: Olawale and Sun 2013)
other success criteria. International Journal of Project
International Project Management Association (IPMA).
INTRODUCTION TO PROJECT MANAGEMENT AND CONTROL | 213
An interactive H5P element has been
excluded from this version of the text. You
After reading this chapter, you should be able to:
• Understand the approach and information
needed to update a construction schedule
an as-planned schedule following a schedule
• Describe the concepts related to schedule
An interactive H5P element has been
excluded from this version of the text. You
After reading this chapter, you should be able to:
• Describe the core concepts required to
• Describe the evolution of a construction cost
• Draw and analyze a cash flow diagram, and
• Calculate the anticipated monthly payments
for a project given expenditure, a project
COST AND FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT | 217
schedule, and contractual terms related to
Throughout the project, the team must always manage the
costs and project finances.Cost Management has been
defined by Gartner (2022) as ‘the process of planning and
controlling the costs associated with running a business’.
which is to develop an estimate for the cost of work to be
Once an organization has developed a cost estimate, that
estimate must then be converted into a budget that will be
used to monitor the progress of the work versus the costs
expended. While an original unit price cost estimate can be
quite detailed, identifying every element of work to be
be organized under a work breakdown structure that allows
218 | COST AND FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT
for the management staff to receive feedback regarding
progress toward the budgeted quantities. This typically
requires that several estimated items be grouped into a single
cash flow of a project, from one organization’s perspective,
is equal to the amount of funds received from the project
Project Cash Flow = Income – Expenses
If the Project Cash Flow is more than zero, then the
their company reserves to support the expenditures on the
project, or they need to borrow funds to cover the project
should seek to maximize its cash flow on any given project
If they have negative cashflows on a number of projects, they
then requires them to pay interest on the loans.
All organizations within a project are aiming to manage
COST AND FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT | 219
their cashflow at the same time. For example, the owner will
need to pay funds to the designers and contractors.
Frequently, the owner is borrowing the funds for the project,
to pay for the work as it progresses. An owner will typically
that they can plan for future expenditures.
Each contractor will also be managing their cashflow,
including the general contractor/construction manager along
with their trade/subcontractors. It is common practice to
contractually arrange that subcontractors do not receive
payment for their work activities until the general or prime
Typical ‘S Curve’ Project Cash Flow
the typical payment process using the AIA contract
documents in order to gain an understanding of the process
along with the impact that this process has on an
220 | COST AND FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT
Within the AIA document series, the template AIA
An interactive H5P element has been
excluded from this version of the text. You
Application and Certification for Payment
An interactive H5P element has been
excluded from this version of the text. You
COST AND FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT | 221
Common Errors in Payment Applications
1. Late Submission: If you submit your application late,
either as a prime contractor or subcontractor, your
2. Overbilling: Never attempt to overbill for work that is
not complete or materials that are not allowed to be
included in the application for payment. Do not ‘front
end load’ the payment application. Overbilling can
cause a payment application to be rejected or delay
payment due to having to revise the application.
3. Forgetting Supporting Documents: Make sure that
you check the contract to identify all required
documents and submit all required documents and
backup so that the owner, and for a subcontractor, the
general contractor, can easily evaluate the application.
4. Calculation Errors: Make sure that you double-, and
triple-check your math on the payment applications.
Using software can help ensure that you do not make
5. Billing for Unapproved Change Orders: The
contractor is not due money for change orders that are
not fully executed. This means that the change order is
documented as a formal, signed change order by all
222 | COST AND FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT
parties to the contract, e.g., the owner and contractor.
An interactive H5P element has been
excluded from this version of the text. You
After reading this chapter, you should be able to:
• Understand the elements of a quality
• Define quality planning, quality assurance and
• Determine core components of the various
Quality management is focused on planning for quality,
developing processes and procedures to ensure quality design
and construction, and performing testing to validate that a
within the Project Management Body of Knowledge as the
three aspects of Quality Management (also see Figure 1):
Figure 1: The Quality Management Process
Who is Responsible for Quality
The owner plays a critical role in the quality management
of quality on a project, along with specific quantitative and
prescriptive descriptions, e.g., the size of various spaces or a
specific material or system desired within a building. In
addition to the program, many larger owners have their own
preferences on material such as using rigid conduit instead
of flex conduit in specific locations even if the building code
would allow flex conduit. This combination of program and
design guidelines informs the design process. If they are not
well done, the owner may not obtain their level of desired
Once a project enters the design process, the owner must
continue to provide timely and decisive feedback related to
be an extensive task. For example, if a university is designing
a classroom, office, and lab building, the owner will need to
coordinate feedback from many user groups, including the
academic units, lab managers, academic administrators, and
the physical plant team that will maintain the building.
Therefore, it can be challenging to get timely feedback for
some decisions. Having an owner’s representative who can
provide timely feedback is critical to the success of projects.
An interactive H5P element has been
excluded from this version of the text. You
After reading this chapter, you should be able to:
• Understand that safety can never be
compromised for other aspects of a
• Be able to define the importance of safety
from an ethical and an economic perspective
• Define effective safety management
approaches to improve overall safety on
• Be able to identify OSHA safety guideline
locations and general reporting requirements
• Understand the impact of construction
As stated in the Fundamental Canons of the ASCE Code of
“1. Engineers shall hold paramount the safety, health and
welfare of the public and shall strive to comply with the
principles of sustainable development in the performance of
The Top Risks and Accident
Figure : The Fatal Four: Top Four Accident Types for
Every project should have a custom project safety plan. This
for all core activities to be performed on the project. OSHA
developed a brief booklet to outline an approach for
developing a Job Hazard Analysis. The sample template
focuses on breaking down each core activity, e.g., bulk
2) transport truck to excavation location; 3) load truck; and
4) transport truck to external site. For each of these tasks,
the team should evaluate the specific hazards for the project,
e.g., for task 1 related to excavation, the hazards may include
overhead electrical lines in location of excavation,
underground utilities in general location of excavation, and
maintaining appropriate safety zone in the location of the
excavation. Then hazard controls can be put into place to
Each trade on the project should be planning these details
related to their activities and they should be shared with the
Figure : Sample Job Hazard Analysis Form (Source:
Figure : OSHA Training Cards (sample) for Construction,
General Industry, Maritime, and Disaster Site Worker
Safety Laws and Regulations
Figure : CII Members Reported Total Recordable Incident
Rate Compared to Industry Average (Source: CII 2019)
Figure : CII Members Reported Days Away, Restricted or
Transferred Compared to Industry Average (Source: CII 2019)
An interactive H5P element has been
excluded from this version of the text. You
Construction Industry Institute (CII). (2019). CII Safety
Summary Report: Summary of CII 2018 Safety Rates.
Construction Industry Institute, University of Texas at
After reading this chapter, you should be able to:
• Describe the various sources of information
that are shared between project participants
• Describe the information management
• Define the role of information management
throughout the project lifecycle
The management of the flow of information on a project
is a critical task of the project management team. As one
construction executive stated to our class, ‘Information is the
A core category of information on projects is the design
information needed to support construction. This
information has traditionally been embedded within the
notes, etc.) and specifications (including the detailed product
information and other requirements). Collectively, the
It is important to note that the use of ‘documents’ to
transmit this construction information remains common
of construction information. One of the most advanced
information is the Randselva Bridge in Norway, a 2,000 feet
long bridge that was constructed entirely from digital models
common, but we are seeing more examples including several
departments of transportation in the U.S. seeking to use a
model as the contractual document for highway and bridge
Figure 1: Randselva Bridge: Digital Model for Construction
with No Traditional Paper Drawings
on a construction project. This correspondence can address
issues, or many other topics. It is important that the
correspondence between parties are captured and archived.
Ideally, this correspondence would be incorporated into a
database that can be easily searched. On many projects, all
to allow for the information to be filed in the project file.
Meeting minutes are notes that are taken to represent the
discussions and decisions made during a meeting. Meeting
and any decisions that are made. Meeting minutes should be
documented and distributed to all participants and any other
include the time/date of the meeting, attendees, acceptance
of any former meeting minutes, agenda items, a summary of
discussions, identification of any future tasks with the
project management system which allows for the easy search
of any topics or decisions. It is important to note that if a
decision is made within a meeting to proceed with work that
is considered a change to the contract, the designer and/or
constructor should notify the owner per their contractual
agreement regarding the potential change.
Whenever we seek to gain an understanding of the
the contract(s). For the purposes of reviewing typical
information management requirements, we will look at the
American Institute of Architects (AIA) standard contract
agreements since these are the most widely adopted template
contracts for commercial building projects. Many items are
defined within the General Conditions portions of the AIA
Figure : AIA B201 Cover Page, Standard Form of Architect’s
Services: Design and Construction Contract Administration
Figure : AIA A201 Cover Page, General Conditions of the
An interactive H5P element has been
excluded from this version of the text. You
After reading this chapter, you should be able to:
• Understand the types of waste on
• Be able to list various methods used on
projects to increase value and reduce waste
• Describe the Last Planner System™
• Understand the process to develop a Lean
Deployment Plan for a project
Lean concepts originated from the Toyota Production
System, and many earlier references to lean concepts reflect
upon Japanese terminologies, such as ‘muda’ for waste or
tenets of Lean (see Figure 1). It is important to note that
the foundation is ‘Respect for People’. Without this respect,
it is difficult to adopt a lean approach on projects or within
Figure 1: The Six Tenets of Lean (Source: Lean Construction
Construction is ‘Respect for People’. Without this respect,
it is not possible to successfully achieve the other five tenets.
This foundation principle is embedded throughout lean
To do so, one must first be able to identify waste. There are
many sources of waste on a construction project. Obvious
waste can be include the the need to redo work that is not
acceptable or wasted time due to not having the proper
Figure 2: The 8 Wastes of Lean (Image source: The Lean
There are many methods that can be applied to achieve the
Lean principles. These can include simple methods, such as
identifying what went well and what could be improved in
future meetings to enable continuous improvement. Or they
can include more complex, comprehensive methods such as
target value design which focuses on developing a design that
of design and construction cost estimating.
Figure 3: Select Operating System and Organizational Lean
Methods (Source: Lean Deployment Planning Guide)
The Last Planner System
Figure 4: The Last Planner System Overview Flowchart
Lean Deployment Planning focuses on the development of a
earlier stages of the project. Ideally, the team members will
get together and collectively develop and document this lean
The Lean Construction Institute through a Penn State
research team developed a guide to support the creation of
a Lean Deployment Plan. This Lean Deployment Planning
Guide walks a project team through a structured process to
design and document their plan. The main steps in this
process are to initiate the plan development, select the lean
methods to be adopted, plan for each method, and integrate
Figure 5: Lean Deployment Planning Process (Source: The
Lean Deployment Planning Guide, Messner et al. 2019)
It is important to note that lean principles, or lean
transformation, can be applied at both a project or an
organizational level. The Lean Enterprise Institute has
developed a lean transformation framework to conceptualize
An interactive H5P element has been
excluded from this version of the text. You
Video 1: The Lean Transformation Framework by the Lean
An interactive H5P element has been
excluded from this version of the text. You
Deployment Planning Guide, Version 1.1, available at
After reading this chapter, you should be able to:
• Understand the trends that are impacting the
future of the construction industry
• Describe the characteristics that need to
change to advance the construction industry
your future knowledge and skills
We started this book, in Chapter 1, discussing some ongoing
THE FUTURE OF THE CONSTRUCTION INDUSTRY | 255
that everyone plays in transitioning our industry to improve
The Changes Occurring in the
Assessing Your Role in Changing
I hope that you have enjoyed this book to expand your
technical skills related to construction management. With
256 | THE FUTURE OF THE CONSTRUCTION INDUSTRY
expand both human and leadership skills. Bill Badger (2019)
developed an interesting summary of Organizational
Leadership that defined several core items to consider:
• Education and training is not an expense, it’s an
• Taking care of your people is the key to successful
• People are the one sustainable competitive advantage
• People matter, it’s all about people, unleash the power of
• Organizations (leaders) must be good communicators to
Badger also defined the shifting skill sets that you will need
as you progress through your career, shifting emphasis from
THE FUTURE OF THE CONSTRUCTION INDUSTRY | 257
Fig. : Evolving Technical, Human, and Leadership Skills
258 | THE FUTURE OF THE CONSTRUCTION INDUSTRY
An interactive H5P element has been
excluded from this version of the text. You
Architects and Builders, Carnegie Mellon University,
PMI (2017). Project Management Body of Knowledge
Model, CIC Technical Report 1, Penn State University,
The process of planning and controlling the costs
Modeled Square Foot Estimate
A modeled square foot estimate, or sometimes simply
characteristics related to important building systems to
construct a model building cost per square foot of area.
facade systems, perimeter quantity, and other project
add-ons. The method used in this class will be from the
Guardian Square Foot Estimating Guide.
purpose ofachieving specific business objectives by
maximizing the effectiveness ofeach participant’s
A prime contractor holds a direct contract with the
construction cost. In this course, we will use the
Reported Square Foot estimating approach within the
Order of Magnitude estimate. Note that project team
members may have their own databases of previous
ROM estimates with historical cost information.
will have their own employees, e.g., carpenters, laborers,
etc. putting the work in place on the construction site.
It is important to note that many construction
management firms do not self-perform much work on a
A specialty contractor performs a specific scope of work
An organized effort directed at analyzing the functions
the purpose of achieving the essential functions at the
lowest life-cycle cost consistent with the required
An organized effort directed at analyzing the functions
for the purpose of achieving the essential functions at
the lowest life-cycle cost consistent with required
Chapter 1: Introduction to the Building Industry
h. Commercial Building (Note that even though it will
house residents, this is considered a commercial
Chapter 2: The Lifecycle of a Building Project
1. Plan Facility, Design Facility, Construct Facility, and
5. Schematic Design (SD), Design Development (DD),
Chapter 3: Project Participants and Roles
Chapter 4: Project Delivery Methods
1. True (for this class – note that many people use different
Chapter 5: Introduction to Construction Cost
Chapter 6: Rough Order of Magnitude (ROM) Cost
Chapter 7: Modeled Square Foot (SF) Cost Estimating
Chapter 8: Assemblies Cost Estimating
Chapter 9: Unit Price Cost Estimating
Chapter 11: General Conditions and Project Staffing
Chapter 12: Introduction to Project Scheduling
Chapter 14: Designing a Site Utilization Plan
Chapter 17: Introduction to Project Management and
Chapter 18: Cost and Financial Management
Chapter 22: Managing Information for Projects
Chapter 23: Introduction to Lean Construction
John Messner is the Charles
and Elinor Matts Professor
Modeling (BIM), digital twin, and automation
inconstruction research and development. John led several
initiatives focused on standardizing BIM planning processes
Directors. He teaches courses on building construction
Drawing title Drawing no. Scale
Drawing title Drawing no. Scale
sheet 03(A1) first floor plan 09 PLOT NO.
sheet 01(A1) Drawing schedule 01 nts
back and right elevation BLOCK NO.
sheet 03(A1) door schedule 11 nts
sheet 01(A1) Birds eye view 03 nts
sheet 02(A1) West elevation 05 1:100 window schedule
DRAWING SCHEDULE scale nts
MAID,S ROOM 1.This drawing is protected under the
6m2 OUTDOOR TOILET kitchen island copyright act and cannot be used or
reproduced in part or whole without
OPEN KITCHEN CLOSED KITCHEN 6m2 consent.
UTILITY 4m2 3.038 3.All construction work is to comply with the
Authority By-Laws and Fire regulations.
PROPOSED RESIDENTIAL HOUSE 7m2 4.P.V denotes permanent ventilation and
must be provided above all doors and
PU DOWN 5.All walls less than200mm thick to be
1 23 circulation reinforced with hoop iron at every alternate
8 to be provided under all walls atleast
8.All reinforced concrete works to structural
ENTRANCE 21 mh . 9 pre-cast or insitu concrete paving slabs to
VERANDA fall,around the building as splash apron
STUDY ROOM unless otherwise stated.
10.Contractors must verify all dimensions
4 and levels on site before commencement
36m2 reported to the Architect before work is put
.0 11.All levels shown are finished levels unless
12.All surface beds to be cast on well
compacted and well consolidated murram
or sand infill where aplicably stated.
7.d.p.c denotes one layer of bituminous felt
to be provided under all walls atleast
27,442 8.All reinforced concrete works to structural
pre-cast or insitu concrete paving slabs to
fall,around the building as splash apron
GROUND FLOOR nts unless otherwise stated.
EAST ELEVATION 10.Contractors must verify all dimensions
06 nts and levels on site before commencement
reported to the Architect before work is put
11.All levels shown are finished levels unless
12.All surface beds to be cast on well
compacted and well consolidated murram
or sand infill where aplicably stated.
mild steel door with frame of
1800X2400mm Porcelain' tiles, straight MASTER LOUNGE FAMILY LOUNGE 0 0
MASTER BALCONY approved adhesive 8
construction work is to comply with the
3 ,2 a vanish cot Authority By-Laws and Fire regulations.
4.P.V denotes permanent ventilation and
must be provided above all doors and
1 2 45mm thick solid core timber 5.All walls less than200mm thick to be
reinforced with hoop iron at every alternate
flash door with transom on
0 top fitted with a 4mm thick 6.Water Meter to be 300mm above G.L.
,2 7.d.p.c denotes one layer of bituminous felt
glass ,hinges and finished with
to be provided under all walls atleast
a vanish cot 150mm above ground level.
27,551 8.All reinforced concrete works to structural
450 high louvered mild steel access 9.Provide one row of 700x700x75mm th.
door. pre-cast or insitu concrete paving slabs to
fall,around the building as splash apron
FIRST FLOOR PLAN nts Fabricated from 1.2–1.6mm thick
0 0 steel sheet with pressed steel frame. 10.Contractors must verify all dimensions
,2 Fixed louvers for permanent and levels on site before commencement
reported to the Architect before work is put
11.All levels shown are finished levels unless
4 0 0 7 12.All surface beds to be cast on well
mild steel door with frame of compacted and well consolidated murram
mild steel door with frame of 16.Architectural drawings should be read
with reference with all other technical
D10. 0 8 1 with locking system ,fit 4mm drawings provided.Where certainity the
mild casement window PLOT NO.
1 W4 0 0 with framing of 1.This drawing is protected under the
,4mm copyright act and cannot be used or
reproduced in part or whole without
9 3 3.All construction work is to comply with the
0 0 0 0 mild casement window Authority By-Laws and Fire regulations.
1 1 1 1 0 0 with framing of 4.P.V denotes permanent ventilation and
0 0 reinforced with hoop iron at every alternate
7.d.p.c denotes one layer of bituminous felt
to be provided under all walls atleast
0 0 0 8 3 80x50x2mmthick,4mm 8.All reinforced concrete works to structural
pre-cast or insitu concrete paving slabs to
fall,around the building as splash apron
6 10.Contractors must verify all dimensions
and levels on site before commencement
reported to the Architect before work is put
W7 0 11.All levels shown are finished levels unless
thick clear glass 12.All surface beds to be cast on well
compacted and well consolidated murram
277 or sand infill where aplicably stated.
0 mild casement window 65mm laidin cem:sand1:4motar 10mm
W9 with framing of Contractor should consult.
13 window schedule scale nts
to follow roof slope otherwise
burnt clay roof caps embeded in cem't motar on
50x50mm celling joists and brandering PLOT NO.
250 slope burnt clay tiles on 25x125 ridge board
apply 1 coat universal undercoat
on 1000 gauge polythene on chicken wire mesh
2 coats pvc decorative timber cornice
50x125 timber struts and ties on Roofing material
75x150 timber tie beam on 75x1oo timber wall
reproduced in part or whole without
of stainless steel 2 9 DETAIL A 2.Read only figured dimensions.
and glass pannels 0 2 8 5 3.All construction work is to comply with the
reinforced with hoop iron at every alternate
kitchen veranda painted walls 327 6 1 course.
6 1 veranda 7.d.p.c denotes one layer of bituminous felt
327 4 1 7 5 p p la a s in te te re d d w a a n ll d s to be provided under all walls atleast
327 pre-cast or insitu concrete paving slabs to
fall,around the building as splash apron
5 ,1 Rafter 10.Contractors must verify all dimensions
327 and levels on site before commencement
reported to the Architect before work is put
Strut 11.All levels shown are finished levels unless
12.All surface beds to be cast on well
compacted and well consolidated murram
or sand infill where aplicably stated.
PLINTH WALL CONS'T NOTES 65mm laidin cem:sand1:4motar 10mm
FOUNDATION NOTES 200mm well burnt clay bricks in plinth wall Ceiling joist thick.
15x150mm timber skirting 16.Architectural drawings should be read
plasterd with water resistant additives
FOOTING on approved flr fin (tiles) with reference with all other technical
anti-termite treatment required FOOTING on 200mm mass conc' slab (1:3:6) Ceiling drawings;structural,mechanical,electrical
on 200x600mm conc' (1;3:6) strip fdt'n and drawings provided.Where certainity the
around all foundation excavations anti-termite treatment required on 1000gauge approved dpc with 300mm overlaps column footings to S.E's specifications Contractor should consult.
400x600mm conc' strip foundation around all foundation excavations on 50mm sand blinding beded Copping
on well compacted and treated earth
class 18 concrete 400x600mm conc' strip foundation on 200mm well hnd compacted hardcore on treated
fdt'n depth to be determined on site
on 50mm sand blinding bed class 18 concrete and firm ground fdt'n depth to be determined on site
on well compacted murrum on 50mm sand blinding bed by SE's recomendations
1:80M SIZES & CAPACITY OF SEPTIC TANK ( TABLE)
manhole cover and 0 8 1:80M 2 2 No of L B D Capacity Length ft run
12.5mm steel float render on 2 min'fall Users (Gally)
A A' through conc'/brickwork covered&uncovered storm water channels 15 1485 1035 1350 347 60
Septic Tank Top Plan 1: 25
GL iron manholes and frame
150 2,200 100mm dia' tee inlet and outlet cast iron pipes
0 Nb:internal and external walls plastered n e outlet
1.This drawing is protected under the
chamber 2 2 reproduced in part or whole without
0 75/100 precast 3.All construction work is to comply with the
B reinforced conc' slab manhole cover GL latest
SIZES & CAPACITY OF SEPTIC TANK ( TABLE) Authority By-Laws and Fire regulations.
Septic Tank Plan 1: 25 4.P.V denotes permanent ventilation and
must be provided above all doors and
0 5 pipe 5.All walls less than200mm thick to be
3 mi n 12mm cem 12mm cem reinforced with hoop iron at every alternate
in1:4cement motar manhole covers manhole cover GL 225 mm solid 0 0 3 D 7.d.p.c denotes one layer of bituminous felt
75/100mm precast reinforced conc'slab brick wall 1:80M to be provided under all walls atleast
GL in1:4cement motar brickwork in min'fall brickwork in
motar 1:80M 0 2 0 2 motar 8.All reinforced concrete works to structural
0 0 3 D 75mm conc'1:2:6 100mm 100mm through conc'/brickwork covered&uncovered storm water channels and levels on site before commencement
where depth does not
reported to the Architect before work is put
mm 11.All levels shown are finished levels unless
pro w o it f h in s g ta c nd o a m r p d o H un 2 d O with standar d H2O Section B-B' 1: 25 compacted and well consolidated murram
12mm internal&external or sand infill where aplicably stated.
where depth does not
consolidated 14.All pipes and services to be at a min.of
200mm1:3:6conc'base approved used GCI sheets or the approved open jointed 15.Well burnt clay bricks:215x102.5x
where depth roofing felt Agricultural drain pipe should 65mm laidin cem:sand1:4motar 10mm
450x600mm cast iron 12mm internal be laid not more than 300mm thick.
Septic Tank Section A-A' 1: 25 manhole cover render1:3cem 100mm dia 1:100 approved below ground level 16.Architectural drawings should be read
plaster steel fl oat GL open joints 'fall Agricultural pipeslaid to with reference with all other technical
half round SELECTED STONE SIZES DOWN TO 3/4"
drainage septic tank details
Percolation Section 1: 25 Percolation Longitudinal Section 1: 25
Drawing title Drawing no. Scale PROJECT
Drawing title Drawing no. Scale
sheet 01(A1) Drawing schedule 01 nts
sheet 03(A1) window schedule 12 nts
sheet 05(A1) drainage details 16 nts NOTES
DRAWING SCHEDULE scale nts
1.This drawing is protected under the
MH BIRDS EYE VIEW scale nts copyright act and cannot be used or
sheet no.1 reproduced in part or whole without
3.All construction work is to comply with the
Authority By-Laws and Fire regulations.
4.P.V denotes permanent ventilation and
3,340 must be provided above all doors and
reinforced with hoop iron at every alternate
7.d.p.c denotes one layer of bituminous felt
4 4 to be provided under all walls atleast
UP 1 UP 1 8.All reinforced concrete works to structural
pre-cast or insitu concrete paving slabs to
5,152 fall,around the building as splash apron
MH 2,200 10.Contractors must verify all dimensions
2,512 and levels on site before commencement
reported to the Architect before work is put
BIRDS EYE VIEW 2 scale nts
SITE LAYOUT PLAN scale nts
v 1 D3 9 8 approved adhesive approved adhesive v
8 8 8 4.P.V denotes permanent ventilation and
sheet no.2 reinforced with hoop iron at every alternate
0 7.d.p.c denotes one layer of bituminous felt
to be provided under all walls atleast
8.All reinforced concrete works to structural
pre-cast or insitu concrete paving slabs to
fall,around the building as splash apron
10.Contractors must verify all dimensions
GROUND FLOOR PLAN scale nts and levels on site before commencement
reported to the Architect before work is put
11.All levels shown are finished levels unless
12.All surface beds to be cast on well
8 with reference with all other technical
15,632 PROJECT PROPOSED RESIDENTAL HOUSE
adhesive 1800X2400mm Porcelain' tiles, with framing of clear glass
flash door with transom on
5 3,200 45mm thick solid core timber
4 2 45mm thick solid core timber
2 2,000 flash door with transom on
004,2 4 top fitted with a 4mm thick CLIENT
0 0 3.All construction work is to comply with the
,2 joints, on approved thick clear glass windows where indicated or shown.
2 900 mild casement window mild steel door with frame of reinforced with hoop iron at every alternate
W9 3 with framing of 1 50x40x3 thick RHS complete course.
to be provided under all walls atleast
8.All reinforced concrete works to structural
45mm thick solid core timber engineers details andspecifications.
glass ,hinges and finished with
10 FIRST FLOOR PLAN scale nts mild casement window a vanish cot 10.Contractors must verify all dimensions
with framing of 45mm thick solid core timber
900 900 glass ,hinges and finished with otherwise stated.
1,600 900 a vanish cot 12.All surface beds to be cast on well
mild steel door with frame of
SOUTH ELEVATION scale nts 055,2 1 with framing of 12 window
12 window schedule scale nts SHEET NUMBER
ROOF CONST'N NOTES PROJECT
burnt clay roof caps embeded in cem't motar on
350 slope burnt clay tiles on 25x125 ridge board
18,098 on 1000 gauge polythene on chicken wire mesh
50x125 timber struts and ties on
75x150 timber tie beam on 75x1oo timber wall
to follow roof slope otherwise
50x50mm celling joists and brandering
0 apply 1 coat universal undercoat
3 2 coats pvc decorative timber cornice
PLINTH WALL CONS'T NOTES
FOOTING 200mm well burnt clay bricks in plinth wall
anti-termite treatment required plasterd with water resistant additives
around all foundation excavations atleast 450mm below G.L
on 1000gauge approved dpc with 300mm overlaps
class 18 concrete column footings to S.E's specifications
on 50mm sand blinding bed on well compacted and treated earth
on 200mm well hnd compacted hardcore on treated
7 on well compacted murrum and firm ground fdt'n depth to be determined on site fdt'n depth to be determined on site
1 by SE's recomendations 1.This drawing is protected under the
copyright act and cannot be used or
7 reproduced in part or whole without
sheet 4 3.All construction work is to comply with the
0 ROOF CONST'N NOTES Authority By-Laws and Fire regulations.
0 burnt clay roof caps embeded in cem't motar on 4.P.V denotes permanent ventilation and
6 350 slope burnt clay tiles on 25x125 ridge board
50x50 battens must be provided above all doors and
on 1000 gauge polythene on chicken wire mesh windows where indicated or shown.
75x150 timber rafterd on 5.All walls less than200mm thick to be
50x125 timber struts and ties on reinforced with hoop iron at every alternate
7.d.p.c denotes one layer of bituminous felt
to follow roof slope otherwise to be provided under all walls atleast
ROOF PLAN scale nts 5 @ 0 6 x 0 5 0 0 c m /c m celling joists and brandering 8
apply 1 coat universal undercoat
2 coats pvc decorative timber cornice 9.Provide one row of 700x700x75mm th.
pre-cast or insitu concrete paving slabs to
fall,around the building as splash apron
10.Contractors must verify all dimensions
+7,150 and levels on site before commencement
11.All levels shown are finished levels unless
plastered and 16.Architectural drawings should be read
FOUNDATION NOTES PLINTH WALL CONS'T NOTES
FOOTING 15x150mm timber skirting 200mm well burnt clay bricks in plinth wall
Wall anti-termite treatment required on approved flr fin (tiles) plasterd with water resistant additives
around all foundation excavations on 200mm mass conc' slab (1:3:6) atleast 450mm below G.L
400x600mm conc' strip foundation on 1000gauge approved dpc with 300mm overlaps on 200x600mm conc' (1;3:6) strip fdt'n and
class 18 concrete on 50mm sand blinding beded column footings to S.E's specifications
on 50mm sand blinding bed on 200mm well hnd compacted hardcore on treated on well compacted and treated earth
on well compacted murrum and firm ground fdt'n depth to be determined on site fdt'n depth to be determined on site
1:80M SIZES & CAPACITY OF SEPTIC TANK ( TABLE)
manhole cover and 0 8 1:80M 2 2 No of L B D Capacity Length ft run
12.5mm steel float render on 2 min'fall Users (Gally)
A A' through conc'/brickwork covered&uncovered storm water channels 15 1485 1035 1350 347 60
Septic Tank Top Plan 1: 25
GL iron manholes and frame
150 2,200 100mm dia' tee inlet and outlet cast iron pipes
0 Nb:internal and external walls plastered n e outlet
chamber distribution copyright act and cannot be used or
chamber 2 2 reproduced in part or whole without
0 75/100 precast 3.All construction work is to comply with the
Authority By-Laws and Fire regulations.
SIZES & CAPACITY OF SEPTIC TANK ( TABLE)
Septic Tank Plan 1: 25 4.P.V denotes permanent ventilation and
must be provided above all doors and
3 n reinforced with hoop iron at every alternate
in1:4cement motar manhole covers manhole cover GL 225 mm solid 0 0 3 D 7.d.p.c denotes one layer of bituminous felt
75/100mm precast reinforced conc'slab brick wall 1:80M to be provided under all walls atleast
GL in1:4cement motar brickwork in min'fall brickwork in
0 0 8.All reinforced concrete works to structural
0 0 3 D 75mm conc'1:2:6 100mm 100mm through conc'/brickwork covered&uncovered storm water channels and levels on site before commencement
where depth does not reported to the Architect before work is put
200 mm 1:3:6conc'base 11.All levels shown are finished levels unless
225mm solid brick wall a t l o l i n b t e e r s n te a e l l p f l lo a a st t er 20mm cem 1 e :3 n f t l o p o la r s fi t n e ' r rendered& TRENCH exceeds1500 mm 12.All surface beds to be cast on well
pro w o it f h in s g ta c nd o a m r p d o H un 2 d O with standar d H2O Section B-B' 1: 25 compacted and well consolidated murram
or sand infill where aplicably stated.
with standard H2O 100mm GL GL at a min.of750mm below reduced ground
proofing compound slope 1in20 selected filling layer,
where depth does not 14.All pipes and services to be at a min.of
200mm1:3:6conc'base approved used GCI sheets or the approved open jointed
where depth roofing felt Agricultural drain pipe should 65mm laidin cem:sand1:4motar 10mm
450x600mm cast iron 12mm internal be laid not more than 300mm
Septic Tank Section A-A' 1: 25 manhole cover render1:3cem 100mm dia 1:100 approved below ground level
plaster steel fl oat GL with reference with all other technical
open joints 'fall Agricultural pipeslaid to
half round SELECTED STONE SIZES DOWN TO 3/4"
drainage septic tank details
Percolation Section 1: 25 Percolation Longitudinal Section 1: 25
Implementation Guide Implementation Guide
1.4.3. The National Building (Standards for Electrical Installations in Buildings) Code, 2019 ..............4
1.4.4. The National Building (Accessibility Standards for Persons with Disabilities) Code, 2019 ........5
1.4.5. The National Building (Standards for Mechanical Installations in Buildings) Code, 2019 .........5
Implementation Guide Implementation Guide
Implementation Guide Implementation Guide
Implementation Guide Implementation Guide
The National Building Review Board (NBRB), a semi-autonomous body, under the Ministry
of Works and Transport, was established under section 3 of the Building Control Act, 2013
(the Act) to, monitor building developments in the country and to oversee, inspect and
monitor the operations of Building Committees among others.
The Minister of Works and Transport issued the National Building Code, 2019 (the Code)
and the Building Control Regulations, 2020 (the Regulations) under sections 46 and 52
of the Act, respectively. The complexity of the Code and Regulations makes it critical for
the membership of the Building Committees to have an in-depth understanding of the
legal and institutional framework in the implementation of the Act. The guide has been
developed to ease the implementation of the building control legal framework. It is my
hope that the material contained herein will ease implementation of the Act, Regulations,
the Code, as well as the use of building control standard documents, manuals and forms.
Finally, I wish to confer my profound gratitude to Arch. Verna Mbabazi and Arch. Mark
Bwambale (Uganda Society of Architects); Eng. Caleb Tugumisirize, Eng. Dr. Abraham
Judah Bumalirivu Muwanguzi and Eng Edward Kasule Musisi (Uganda Institution of
Professional Engineers); Ms Juliet Komugisa (Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs)
and Arch. Jerome Olowo Stowell (NBRB Secretariat) for the credible input and eventual
preparation of this implementation guide. I similarly thank their parent institutions for
seconding to us such a dedicated team of true technocrats.
Implementation Guide Implementation Guide
The material and information contained in this Implementation Guide is for general
information and ease of reference only. The information in the Guide is not intended
to substitute the laws, Regulations and Code cited in this Guide. Users of the Guide are
encouraged to refer to the detailed text of the relevant law in order to make any business,
Implementation Guide Implementation Guide
Prior to enactment of the Building Control Act, 2013, building operations were regulated
by the Public Health Act Cap. 269 and regulations made thereunder. However, the
Public Health Act did not comprehensively address the concerns of the construction of
buildings and related installations in Uganda, thus the need for a specific law to regulate
1.1. The need for a specific law to regulate building operations
The construction of buildings and installations have been carried out in cities, urban
centres and rural areas without adequate supervision and monitoring by Government.
This has greatly compromised public safety due to failure to ensure structural integrity of
buildings, failure to observe building standards and adherence to the law.
The construction of buildings has had numerous challenges including-
(a) Deficiencies in the law. The Public Health Act, Cap. 269 was inadequate to regulate
the building sector due to the following-
i. prescription of imperial units instead of SI units;
ii. fines, fees and penalties that do not reflect the current social and economic
iii. reference to some materials that are no longer in use and some which are
iv. exclusion of some materials and construction methods that have evolved with
v. no requirement for construction of buildings that allow for special accessibility
for persons with disabilities (PWDs).
(b) uncontrolled use of substandard materials resulting in a high rate of construction
(e) Unhygienic, unsafe buildings and general lack of maintenance.
The Building Control Act, 2013 was enacted to address the above challenges and to
ensure safety and orderly developments on the limited and highly competitive land
1.2. The Building Control Act
The purpose of the Building Control Act, 2013 (Act) is to consolidate, harmonise and
amend the law relating to the erection of buildings, to provide for building standards, to
establish a National Building Review Board and Building Committees, to promote and
ensure planned, decent and safe building structure that are developed in harmony with
Implementation Guide Implementation Guide
The Building Control Act, 2013, has seven Parts and 3 Schedules as highlighted below-
1. Part I provides for preliminary matters of the Act such as commencement and
interpretation of important phrases used in the Act.
2. Part II- establishes the National Building Review Board as a body corporate
composed of 16 members representing various institutions such as the Ministry
of Works and Transport, Ministry of Lands Housing and Urban Development,
Ministry of Health, professional bodies regulating Engineers, Architects, Lawyers,
Surveyors and Physical Planners, interalia, as elaborated further under institutional
arrangement for implementation of the Act.
3. Part III-deals with the Secretariat and other staff
The Board is supported by the Secretariat that is headed by the Executive Secretary
assisted by other staff. The Executive Secretary is the Chief Executive Officer of the
Board and is responsible for the day to day operations of the Board. (s.16).
The Board has powers to recruit staff under s.17 to assist it in the performance of its
functions and also to hire consultants under s.18.
4. Part IV –deals with Finances of the Board in sections 20-27 of the Act.
The Board is a self-accounting body whose source of funds is monies appropriated
by Parliament, fees for services rendered or from grants and donations from well-
5. Part V establishes the Building Committees
Section 28 establishes a Building Committee at every district and urban council.
Section 29 provides for the functions of the Building Committee including-
i. to scrutinise and approve building plans;
ii. to issue building permits and occupation permits;
iii. to ensure that the design and construction of buildings and utilities to
which the public is to have access cater for persons with disabilities;
iv. to review decisions on applications for permits for minor building works
submitted to a building control officer under section 39; and
v. to ensure compliance with the Act.
More details on the committees are elaborated below under institutional
arrangement for implementation of the Act.
6. Part VI- deals with Control of Buildings Operations including powers of the Building
Committee to stop building operation under section 40 and power to order
remedial action on defective buildings under section 41. Further, under this Part,
the Minister has power to prohibit unsafe building methods and materials under
section 42. The Building Control Officer is empowered to enter any premises to
inspect or carry out tests under s.43. This Part also regulates the grant of occupation
permits (s.44) and liability for causing accidents on building construction site (s.45).
Implementation Guide Implementation Guide
It should be noted that it is no longer “business as usual” as the Act prescribes an
offence for any person whose negligence, commission or omission causes or leads
to the occurrence of an accident on a building construction site, which results
in the injury or death of another person, or the destruction of property. Such a
person is liable on conviction to a fine not exceeding two hundred eighty eight
currency points or to imprisonment not exceeding twelve years or both.
7. Part VII- deals with Miscellaneous matters such as powers of the Minister to issue
the National Building Code under section 46 of the Act, reports required under the
Act (s.47), power of the Minister to give directions (s.48), delegation of Minister’s
powers and the extent of delegation (s.49), note however that the Minister cannot
delegate his or her powers to prohibit use of a building method or material,
power to issue the National Building Code and Regulations and power to amend
the Schedules to the Act. All other powers may be delegated by instrument of
delegation. Part VII also deals with service of notices, power of the Minister to issue
regulations (s.52), amendment of Schedules, transition and effect of the Act on
existing applicable laws. It should be noted that the Building Control Act, 2013
takes precedence over existing laws that are inconsistent with it.
8. Schedule 1 provides for the value of a currency point which is equivalent to twenty
9. Seclude 2 provides for meetings and procedure of the Board, including, calling
meetings, quorum, disclosure of interest of members and validity of proceedings
not affect by vacancy, among other matters.
10. Schedule 3 provides for meetings and procedure of Building Committees,
including, calling meetings, quorum, disclosure of interest of members and validity
of proceedings not affect by vacancy, among other matters.
Regulations are a type of subsidiary legislation issued by a “delegate of Parliament”
to prescribe the detailed procedural requirements necessary for operationalization
In the case of the Building Control Act, 2013, section 52 empowers the Minister,
on the advice of the Board, to make regulations generally for better carrying into
effect of the provisions of the Act.
Under that provision, the BCR, 2020 were issued by the Minister and prescribe the
i. the content of building plans and other documents required to be submitted
ii. the procedure and the costs to be paid in respect of any appeal lodged with
Implementation Guide Implementation Guide
iii. the penalties for breach of the Regulations.
Section 46 of the Act empowers the Minister to issue the National Building Code
(NBC). The NBC provides for matters relating to -
It should be noted that the Act does not define the word ‘Code’. However,
according to Blacks Law Dictionary 8th Ed, “a code is a complete system of
positive law, carefully arranged and officially promulgated; a systematic
collection or revision of laws, rules or regulations. A Code is a compilation not
just of existing statutes, but also much of the unwritten law on a subject, which
is newly enacted as a complete system of law.”
On basis of that construction of the term Code, the NBC has been issued by the
Minister compiling existing written standards (such as Public Health Building
Rules) and unwritten standards relating to building operations.
The National Building Code has been issued in chapters as follows-
This provides standards for both private and public buildings in aspects of site
laying, building design, building materials, building services, environmental
protection and energy efficiency in buildings.
This provides the basis of design, standards for loads, the characteristics of
strength of structural materials, geotechnical investigations to ensure that
buildings perform satisfactorily during the intended life, sustain all loads and
deformations of normal construction and use and afford adequate durability
and resistance to the effects of nature; to ensure due regard is given to economy
1.4.3. The National Building (Standards for Electrical Installations in Buildings)
This provides for standards for electrical installations including designs,
methods of installation, fundamental requirements for safety, wiring and
wiring accessories, underground cables standards, solar power supply system,
Implementation Guide Implementation Guide
1.4.4. The National Building (Accessibility Standards for Persons with Disabilities)
This provides for standards that must be complied with by all buildings accessible
by PWDs. E.g. signage used should be international symbol of access- in terms
of direction, name of facility, height of lettering, reserved parking slots, number
of parking clots, marking, size of slots, location of the parking slots viz a vie
1.4.5. The National Building (Standards for Mechanical Installations in Buildings)
This deals with standards for plumbing works, drainage works, septic tanks,
1.4.6. The National Building (Post Code Numbering) Code, 2019
This adopts addressing standards which include a description of the different
postal and geographical address type to facilitate local government and other
agencies, business and postal courier operators in the efficient and effective
delivery of postal and other social services.
Other laws that relevant to building operations include-
Is the Supreme Law of Uganda upon which all other laws must
This Act provides for the establishment of the National Physical Planning
Board, its composition, functions and procedure of the Board; it establishes
district and urban physical planning committees; provides for the making
and approval of physical development plans and for the applications for
This Act provides for the law relating to environmental management in Uganda
and the management of the environment for sustainable development.
The Act also establishes the National Environment Management Authority
as a coordinating, monitoring, regulatory and supervisory body for all
activities relating to environment; provides for emerging environmental
issues including climate change, the management of hazardous chemicals
and biodiversity offsets. It provides for strategic environmental assessment;
how to address environmental concerns arising out of petroleum activities
and midstream operations, management of plastics and plastic products.
The Act further establishes the Environmental Protection Force; provides
for enhanced penalties for offences under the Act.
Implementation Guide Implementation Guide
The Land Act provides for the tenure, ownership and management of land
and it amends and consolidates the law relating to tenure, ownership and
This Act regulates the transfer of land and registration of titles in Uganda.
This Act provides for the law relating to local governments in line with the
Constitution and gives effect to the decentralisation and devolution of
functions, powers and services. It provides for decentralisation at all levels of
local governments to ensure good governance and democratic participation
in, and control of, decision making by the people; it further provides for
revenue and the political and administrative setup of local governments;
This Act consolidates the law regarding to preservation of public health in
This Act consolidates and harmonises the law relating to occupational
health and repeals the Factories Act, Cap.220.
1.5.9. The Public Procurement and Disposal of Assets Act, 2003, Act No.1 of 2003
This Act establishes the Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets
Authority to formulate policies and regulate practices in respect of public
procurement and disposal activities. This Act is particularly relevant to public
This Act provides for the establishment of the Engineers Registration Board,
its powers and functions and provides for the registration of engineers.
This Act provides for the establishment of the Surveyors Registration Board,
its powers and functions and provides for the registration of surveyors.
This Act provides for the establishment of the Architects Registration Board,
defines the powers and functions of the board and provides for the registration
Implementation Guide Implementation Guide
This Act provides for the structure, organisation and functions of the police
force, a police disciplinary code of conduct, a Police Welfare Fund, a police
tender board among others. Under section 4 of the Act, the police are
mandated to among others enforce the laws of Uganda and to prevent
and detect crime in the society. As such, the police is an important body
in as far as investigation of offences under the Building Control Act, 2013
is concerned. Once the police have investigated any criminal matter, the
record of investigation is submitted to the Office of the Director of Public
Prosecutions who, under article 120 of the Constitution, is mandate to
prosecute criminal matters in courts of law.
2. Institutional Framework for Building Control
The Act establishes the following institutions responsible for its implementation-
1. The National Building Review Board
3. The Office of the Building Control Officer
The institutional framework established under the Act is intended to ensure that
construction of buildings from planning to completion and later on maintenance is
done in a safe way and in harmony with the environment.
2.1. The National Building Review Board
The NBRB is a semi-autonomous body established under section 3 of the Building
The Board is a representative board composed of sixteen members as follows-
(a) one representative of the department responsible for building works;
(b) one representative of the department responsible for physical planning;
(c) one representative of the ministry responsible for water and environment;
(d) one representative of the department responsible for housing;
(e) a representative of the Ministry responsible for persons with disabilities;
(f) one representative of each of the following professions, nominated for
appointment by the relevant professional body or association—
Implementation Guide Implementation Guide
(g) a public health officer from the Ministry responsible for health;
(h) a representative of persons with disabilities nominated for appointment by
the National Council for Disability;
(i) a representative of workers nominated for appointment by the national
(j) a representative of Uganda Local Authorities Association of Uganda
nominated for appointment by the Uganda Local Governments Association;
(k) a representative of Urban Authorities Association of Uganda nominated for
appointment by the Association of Urban Authorities;
(l) one person from the private sector nominated for appointment by the
2.1.1. Functions of the National Building Review Board
Under section 9 of the Act, the functions of the Board are-
(b) to ensure building standards for design and construction of buildings;
(c) to oversee, inspect and monitor the operations of Building Committees;
(d) to oversee, inspect and monitor the operations of Building Committees;
(e) to hear and determine appeals from persons dissatisfied with the
(f) to determine the fees to be charged by urban and district building
committees for approval of plans, issue of building permits and
The establishment of the Board to monitor building operations and
oversee the operations of the Building Committees at local governments
is intended to improve the building operations in Uganda. This is expected
to be through coordinating and working with all stakeholders in the sector
including professionals at local governments and private sector, developers,
contractors, among others by guiding on compliance with the relevant laws
and ensuring accountability of any person for noncompliance with the Act.
Section 28 of the Act establishes a Building Committee at every district and
Implementation Guide Implementation Guide
2.2.1. Building Committee at the district
The Building Committee at the district is composed of the following
iii. Chairperson of the Planning and Development Committee of the District
iv. the officer responsible for physical planning
v. the officer responsible for health
vi. the officer responsible for engineering
vii. the officer responsible for land management
viii. the officer responsible for environment management
ix. an officer responsible for architecture
x. a representative of the PWDs nominated by the National Council for
Disability at the district level
xi. a member of the district executive committee
xii. an officer from the police department responsible for fire prevention
2.2.2. Building Committee at urban authority
The Building Committee at urban authority is composed of the following
ii. Chairperson of the Planning and Development Committee of the District
iii. Chairperson of the Urban Planning and Development Committee of the
iv. the officer responsible for physical planning
v. the officer responsible for health
vi. the officer responsible for engineering
vii. the officer responsible for land management
viii. the officer responsible for environment management
ix. an officer responsible for architecture
x. a representative of the persons with disabilities nominated by the
National Council for Disability at the district level
Implementation Guide Implementation Guide
The Building Committees have all the required professionals as members
to ensure that all aspects of building permit application are adequately
Under section 29 the functions of each Building Committee is-
(a) to scrutinise and approve building plans;
(b) to issue building permits and occupation permits;
(c) to ensure that the design and construction of buildings and
utilities to which the public is to have access cater for persons with
(d) to review decisions on applications for permits for minor building
works submitted to a building control officer under section 39;
(e) to ensure that the Act is complied with; and
(f) to perform any other function assigned to it by the Board
• Building Committees may co-opt professionals to assist in the
performance of their duties under s.30. This is an important provision
especially for districts and urban councils that may not have all the
required professionals to co-opt the professionals in the private sector to
assist in the scrutiny of building plans.
• S.31 and Schedule 3 provide for the procedure of the Building Committees
including calling of meetings, quorum and decisions, minutes of the
meeting, validity of proceedings not affected by vacancy, disclosure of
• It should be noted that under paragraph 2 of Schedule 3, the quorum
for a meeting of a Building Committee is two-thirds of the members
including at least one member of the District Executive Committee in
the case of a District Building Committee or one executive member
of the Urban Planning and Development Committee in the case of an
Urban Building Committee and decisions are made by a majority of
the votes of the members present and voting. However, in case of an
equality of votes, the person presiding at the meeting has a casting vote
in addition to his or her deliberative vote.
Implementation Guide Implementation Guide
• Under paragraph 4 of Schedule 3, the validity of any proceedings of a
Building Committee is not affected by a vacancy in its membership or by
any defect in the appointment or qualification of a member or by reason
that a person not entitled, took part in its proceedings.
• It follows from the above paragraphs, the Building Committee need not
have all the members referred to under section 28 of the Act in order to
conduct its affairs, presence of two thirds of the members is sufficient.
It should be noted that the Building Committees have been established by
the Act, therefore, to operationalise the relevant provisions of the law, the
Chief Administrative Officer in the case of a District Building Committee
and Town Clerk, in the case of Building Committee at Urban Authority is
expected to formally appoint the members, set the terms of reference of
the Committees (in accordance with section 29 of the Act) and induct them
• Note: the NBRB under section 52 of the Act is required to recommend to
the Minister the remuneration and allowances that may be paid to the
2.3. The Building Control Officer
Section 32 of the Act establishes the office of the Building Control Officer (BCO).
The BCO is required to be appointed by the District Service Commission.
Under section 33, the functions of BCOs are-
(b) to forward all applications to the Building Committee for review;
(c) to ensure that any instructions given by a Building Committee are complied
iii. any activity, in respect with sections 35 and 39;
(e) to carry out regular inspection of completed buildings and any duty
The qualifications of BCOs and Assistant BCOs are prescribed under the
Implementation Guide Implementation Guide
Under regulation 18, a Building Control Officer or Urban Building Control
Officer shall be a degree holder in either architecture, engineering, or quantity
surveying, with a minimum of five years continuous employment in the
construction industry and registered with the relevant professional body.
While an Assistant Building Control Officer shall be a diploma holder in
architecture, engineering or quantity surveying, a member of the relevant
professional association with a minimum of three years continuous
This institutional framework established under the Act is intended to ensure
that construction of buildings from planning to completion and later on
maintenance is done in a way that’s safe and harmonious with the environment.
Regulations 19, 21 and 22 of the Building Control Regulations, 2020 provide
for application for a building permit in respect of minor building works,
commercial or residential building operations, complex structures and public
Subsection (2) of regulations 19, 21 and 22 requires an application for building
permit to be accompanied by “proof of ownership of land in accordance
with the Land Act, including the certificate of title, power of attorney from
the registered proprietor or other satisfactory proof of ownership”.
The Building Control Regulations 2020, clearly guides the Building Control
Officer in case of minor building works, and the Building Committee in the
case of other classes of buildings regarding proof of land ownership, that is to
say, land ownership may be proved by-
The Constitution and the Land Act, provide for the different forms of land
Implementation Guide Implementation Guide
tenure systems for which certificates of title may be issued. Accordingly,
the Building Control Officer and the Building Committee should carefully
scrutinise proof of ownership or interest in the land in respect of which an
application for a building permit is made before making a decision on the
Article 237 of the Constitution provides for land ownership.
Clause (1) provides that Land in Uganda belongs to the citizens of Uganda and
shall vest in them in accordance with the land tenure systems provided for in
Clause (3) provides for the land tenure system and states that land in Uganda
shall be owned in accordance with the following land tenure systems-
Clause (8) of article 237 protects the security of occupancy on land of lawful or
bonafide occupants on mailo land, freehold or leasehold land.
The Land Act, under Part II reechoes the land tenure system under article 237
of the Constitution and provides for a certificate of customary occupancy and
a certificate of occupancy for lawful and bonafide occupants (see sections
From the above provisions, registrable interests are clearly elaborated as
Implementation Guide Implementation Guide
Under section 59 of the Registration of Titles Act, a certificate of title is
conclusive proof of land ownership or interest in the land.
It follows therefore that presentation of a certificate of title is conclusive
proof of ownership or interest in the land.
The Building Committee or Building Control Officer when confronted with
an application for building permit, should scrutinise the title presented and
carry out a search on the title by contacting the Ministry responsible for
lands to confirm ownership (See copies of different types of certificate of
Under section 146 of the Registration of Titles Act, a proprietor of land may
appoint any person to act for him or her in dealing with his or her land
by signing a power of attorney. In such a case, where an application for a
building permit is submitted to the Building Committee by another person
not being the registered proprietor of the land, the Committee should
request for a power of attorney. The power of attorney must be clear as to
the extent of authority granted (see copy of power of attorney in Annex
2.4.3. Other satisfactory proof of ownership or interest in land
Other satisfactory proof of ownership may include-
An agreement in respect of land may also be used as proof of an interest
in the land. This may be a sale agreement (before formal transfer in case of
titled land) or agreement between owner of land and another to use the
latter’s land for a specified period of time.
Care must be taken by the Building Committee or Building Control Officer
to ensure that the agreement has all the relevant information to prove an
interest in the land. Some of the important information to look out for in
an agreement to ensure that it is authentic include-the signatures of the
parties, clear description of the land in respect of which the application
for building permit is sought. The agreement should describe location of
the land i.e. village, sub county, district, neighbours in the north, east, west,
south or at all the boundaries, the size of the land, and should also indicate
the witnesses to the agreement (witnesses should be persons of 18years and
Implementation Guide Implementation Guide
above) (See sample agreement in respect of land attached as Annex 3).
Letters of administration or letters of probate may also be used as proof
of interest in land where land of a deceased has not yet been transferred
into the name of an administrator or executor of an estate of deceased
person at the time of application for building permit (see copy of letters of
Implementation Guide Implementation Guide
i. A building permit gives the developer permission to carry out building operations
on their property as defined in the Act.
ii. A person who carries out a building operation without a permit commits an
iii. A building permit is evidence that a building has been designed according to
building standards enshrined in the National Building Code, 2019.
3.1. Scrutiny and approval of building plans
i. Building operations are interpreted in the Act and are classified in Schedule 2 of
ii. “Minor building works” are interpreted in Section 2 of the Act and Form 1 of
iii. Form 2 of Schedule 3 of the Regulations shall apply for all other operations not
i. Approval Fees in consideration of the scrutiny of plans, permits and inspection
shall be assessed in accordance with Regulation 38, Schedule 4 of the Regulation
and the latest publication of fees in the Gazette.
ii. BCO should ensure all billable elements of the proposed building development
are billed and an invoice prepared for the developer
iii. Invoice should indicate a breakdown of all elements billed for ease of accountability
iv. BCO should use the opportunity to check completeness of applicant’s file at this
point as per Forms 1 and 2 of Schedule 3 of the Building Control Regulations
v. The BCO should advice on any lacking information to minimize incidences of
applicants presenting incomplete applications
vi. The prescribed application fees shall be paid on or before the day an application is
submitted to the Building Committee (Regulation 38(3))
vii. Incomplete or improper applications shall be returned to the applicant on
presentation. The applicant may resubmit the revised application and shall pay
resubmission fees as prescribed in Schedule 4 of the Regulations.
i. Preliminary building permit enquiries may be made in case of complex structures
or public buildings. These enquiries are free of charge.
Implementation Guide Implementation Guide
ii. Applications are to be made on Form 1 or 2, in schedule 3 of the regulations,
iii. The Building Committee may receive applications in hard copy or electronic format
iv. The officer receiving application should confirm appropriateness of form used
and presence of all required documentation for the particular category of building
v. Ensure the professionals authoring any plans possess a current practicing
certificate. The BCO shall contact the relevant Professional Registration Boards for
vi. Incomplete or improper applications shall be returned to the applicant on
vii. The applicant may resubmit the revised application and shall pay resubmission
fees as prescribed in Schedule 4 of the Regulations. In order to ensure this is
feasible and efficient, it is necessary that the committee delegates this function
to the BCO or other appropriate officer of the Building Control Authority manning
the receiving point for applications
viii. Reasons for return should be noted on the application forms, plans and records of
the Building Committee for proper accountability.
ix. Once the applicant has returned the application after rectifying any anomalies
previously raised, ensure resubmission fees have been paid before accepting the
i. BCs shall establish a building control records system to track their operations
and decisions for purposes of accountability. An application to a BC is usually
the first step establishing a relationship between an owner of a building
ii. Specific attention shall be given to reporting requirements by the NBRB as
prescribed in Form 5 – Part II of the Regulations
iii. For uniformity, the NBRB recommends the following format for application
Physical Planning Act 2010, National Environmental Act 2019, Occupational
Safety and Health Act 2006, National Physical Planning Standards and
Guidelines (NPPSG), The Building Control (Accessibility Standards For Persons
i. Ensure all required documents contain all design and construction information
as is necessary to arrive at proper and informed decisions regarding a particular
ii. BCs are advised to establish a mechanism to ensure or confirm authenticity of
Implementation Guide Implementation Guide
documents or clearances from other agencies that form part of an application
iii. While examining site plans, ensure to base on the effective area of the site
excluding existing easements affecting the land such as roads traversing
the land, utility wayleaves/easements, etc. as well as encroachments by
neighbouring properties that have not been resolved.
iv. It is important that the applicant’s surveyor accurately maps out all this
information, as well as existing mature trees while conducting the boundary
survey required under R21 and R22 and this information shall be included as
appropriate on the context and/or site plan contemplated in R9.
v. The capacity of traversing and neighbouring utilities and the corresponding
width of easements shall be as prescribed by applicable law or as advised by
the relevant authority as easement extents may vary.
vi. Ensure that there is no material/significant deviation from the site plan
approved by PPC and ensure to seek the opinion of the Physical Planner in
vii. Check that location, context/block and site plans possess the North arrow as
prescribed by regulations and ensure the orientation is consistent on all such
viii. Check that scales and annotation used conform to the minimum prescribed
by the relevant regulation and that information is legible.
ix. Check that conditions in any EIA certificate or TIA clearance are adhered to
such as siting of the building, location and orientation of vehicular access and
exit points relative to the adjacent network, etc.
x. Subject to PPC approval conditions, any parking planned/designed for the
building development shall be located within the site boundaries
xi. In case of presentation of landscape plans, whether voluntarily or as a
requirement of the Committee, these shall conform to the regulations.
xii. Detailed checklists are included in Annex 1-4
i. Meetings shall, as a minimum, adhere to standards prescribed in Schedule 3 of
ii. The meeting shall consider recommendations from the Building Control
Officer as prescribed in Form 3 of Schedule 3 of the Regulations.
iii. Proceedings shall be recorded as prescribed in Form 5 – Part I of Schedule 3 of
iv. Monthly reports shall be submitted to the National Building Review Board as
per Form 5 – Part II of Schedule 3 of the Regulations
i. The Building Committee has thirty days to either issue a building permit to the
applicant or to defer or reject the application.
ii. The Building Committee shall notify the Building Control Officer of its decision
Implementation Guide Implementation Guide
as prescribed in Form 4 – Part II of Schedule 3 of the Regulations.
iii. The Building Control Officer shall ensure that any instruction given by the
Building Committee in accordance with the Act are complied with.
iv. Incomplete applications shall be returned to the Applicant. The applicant
may resubmit the application to the Building Committee and shall pay are
3.2. Issuance of the building permit
i. The procedure for issuing building permits shall as prescribed in Section 36 of
ii. In the case where the Building Committee approves a building permit
application, the Chairman shall sign the permit, the building plan and other
documents and return one endorsed copy to the applicant.
iii. The form of building permit is prescribed in Form 4(I) of Schedule 3 of the
iv. The professionals whose services shall be retained for the purpose of supervising
the construction of the building shall be indicated on the building permit.
Should the applicant chose to change the supervising team, the Building
v. Applicants should be clearly informed about the time limit building operations
face as prescribe in Section 38 of the Act.
3.3. Review of permits for minor building works
i. Minor building works are interpreted in section 2 of the Act and are classified
ii. Applications for minor building works shall be made to the Building Control
Officer as prescribed in Regulation 19 and Form 1 of Schedule 3 of the Regulations
iii. Engagement of professionals for minor building works is optional.
Any building or building operation commenced before the coming into force of this Act
and which does not conform to the standards prescribed by this Act shall be adjusted so
as to bring it in conformity with this Act within a period prescribed by the Minister.
Implementation Guide Implementation Guide
4. BUILDING SITE OPERATIONS AND MANAGEMENT
i. A person shall not commence a building operation prior to giving a notice in
writing to the Building Committee as prescribed in Reg. 27.
ii. All building operations shall be inspected in order to ensure compliance with
iii. The Building Committee shall prescribe how inspections of building operations
shall be carried out through conditions in the building permit
iv. A report on the inspection of the stages shall be provided using the inspection
i. A Building Committee must approve all demolition works prior to being
ii. A Building Committee shall ensure adherence to all safety precautions during
It is the responsibility of the Building Committee to prescribe how site operations shall
i. A developer may with the approval of the Building Committee erect temporary
ii. The sheds shall be maintained in good order and condition at all times during
Implementation Guide Implementation Guide
A person shall not commence any building operations without installing sanitary facilities
for personnel at the building site or at a reasonably close location as approved by the
4.6. Excavations and measures for stability of site
It is the function of the Building Committee to ensure that excavations are undertaken
All buildings shall be subject to compulsory maintenance as prescribed by Reg. 33
Implementation Guide Implementation Guide
i. It is the function of the Building Committee to issue Occupation Permits
ii. Upon the completion of a building, the owner of the building shall notify the
Building Committee of the practical completion and apply to the Building
iii. The Building Committee shall, within fourteen days after receipt of notification
of completion of a building and receipt of an application for an occupation
permit, examine the building, and may issue an occupation permit or refuse to
issue the occupation permit giving reasons in writing
5.1. Scrutiny and approval of building works
i. Application for an Occupation Permit shall be as prescribed in Section 52 of the
ii. The application shall be as prescribed in Form 9 of Schedule 3 of the regulations.
5.1.1. Receipt of Applications for Occupation Permits Compliance checks
i. For purposes of these guidelines, only permitted building operations that have
been fully inspected shall be considered. Illegal and non-compliant building
operations shall be considered under a separate procedure.
ii. Applications are to be made on Form 9 – Part I or II - in schedule 3 of the
regulations, depending on the nature of occupation permit being sought;
iii. The professionals whose services were retained for the purpose of supervising
the construction of the building shall certify the application.
iv. The officer receiving application should confirm appropriateness of form used
and presence of all required documentation for the particular Occupation
v. Ensure the professionals authoring any documents possess a current practicing
certificate. The BCO shall contact the relevant Professional Registration Boards
for updated list of practicing professionals.
vi. Incomplete or improper applications shall be returned to the applicant on
i. BCs shall establish a building control records system to track their operations
and decisions for purposes of accountability.
i. For uniformity, the NBRB recommends the following format for application
Implementation Guide Implementation Guide
ii. Specific attention shall be given to reporting requirements by the NBRB as
prescribed in Form 5 – Part II of the Regulations
i. The BCO shall ensure that the building was built in conformity to the approved
ii. The BCO needs inspect the building works, inspection book and “As Built
drawings” to ensure that they do not deviate significantly from the drawings
submitted at the Building Permit stage or, if they do, procedures (regarding
necessary approvals) and standards were followed.
iii. Ensure all required documents contain all information necessary to arrive at
proper and informed decisions regarding a particular application
iv. BCs are advised to establish a mechanism to ensure or confirm authenticity of
documents or clearances from other agencies that form part of an application
i. Meetings shall, as a minimum, adhere to standards prescribed in Schedule 3 of
ii. The meeting shall consider recommendations from the Building Control
Officer as prescribed in Form 3 of Schedule 3 of the Regulations.
iii. Proceedings shall be recorded as prescribed in Form 5 – Part I of Schedule 3 of
iv. Monthly reports shall be submitted to the National Building Review Board as
per Form 5 – Part II of Schedule 3 of the Regulations
i. The Building Committee has fourteen days from receipt of an application to
either issue an occupation permit to the applicant or to refuse to issue the
occupation permit stating their reasons in writing.
ii. The Building Committee shall notify the Building Control Officer of its decision
as prescribed in Form 4 – Part II of Schedule 3 of the Regulations.
iii. The Occupation Permit shall be revoked in cases outlined in Regulation 35
iv. The Building Control Officer shall ensure that any instruction given by the
Building Committee in accordance with the Act are complied with.
Implementation Guide Implementation Guide
i. Approval Fees in consideration of the scrutiny of plans, permits and inspection
shall be assessed in accordance with Regulation 38, Schedule 4 of the Regulation
and the latest publication of fees in the Gazette.
ii. The BCO should ensure all billable elements of the proposed building
development are billed and an invoice prepared for the developer
iii. Invoice should indicate a breakdown of all elements billed for ease of
iv. The prescribed application fees shall be paid before the Occupation Permits is
5.2. Issuance of the occupation permit
i. The procedure for issuing building permits shall be as prescribed in Section 44
ii. In the case where the Building Committee approves an occupation permit
application, the Chairman shall sign the permit, the building plan and other
documents and return one endorsed copy to the applicant.
iii. The form of Occupation Permit is prescribed in Form 10 of Schedule 3 of the
Implementation Guide Implementation Guide
ANNEX 1: TYPES OF CERTIFICATE OF TITLE
Implementation Guide Implementation Guide
Implementation Guide Implementation Guide
Implementation Guide Implementation Guide
Implementation Guide Implementation Guide
Implementation Guide Implementation Guide
Implementation Guide Implementation Guide
ANNEX 2: COPY OF POWER OF ATTORNEY
A POWER OF ATTORNEY granted on the 10th day of October 2015 by …… of P.o Box
7 Kampala (hereinafter called “the Land Owner”) to …….. of P.o Box 18 Kampala (hereinafter
(a) The Land Owner is the registered proprietor of land comprised in Block 10
Plot 15, Nabutiiti, Wakiso District (hereinafter called “the Land”).
(hereinafter called “the Agreement”), the Attorney and the Land Owner have agreed to
pursue a joint venture to construct and complete a residential housing development on
(c) Upon completion of the Project, the Attorney is entitled to certain strata
(d) Under the terms of the Agreement, the Land Owner was entitled to and did
assign all his rights, title interest benefits advantages permits, licences and remedies in
under or arising out of the Agreement to the Attorney.
(e) Under the terms of the Agreement, the Land Owner has agreed to execute
such agreements or deeds as may be required to procure the development of the Project.
The Land Owner has also agreed to transfer the Units to the Attorney or such other
purchaser of the Units as the Attorney shall direct and pursuant thereto will enter into any
options, agreements, deeds or documents as shall be necessary to enable the Attorney to
market and sell all of the Units.
Now, the Land Owner HEREBY APPOINTS the Attorney and each of the authorised officers
of the Attorney for the time being to be the true and lawful attorney of the Land Owner
with full power to substitute, appoint and discharge from time to time one or more
attorneys in the name of the Land Owner and on the Land Owner’s behalf to execute or
do all or any of the following acts, deeds and things :-
1. To make and submit applications and plans to the appropriate government
departments, local authorities or other competent authorities and execute,
swear or affirm all documents, deeds, plans, instruments and declarations for the
purpose of obtaining or securing or renewing any planning permissions, building
plan approval, Temporary Occupation Permit or Certificate of Completion or any
other licences, approvals, permits or exemptions in connection with or incidental
to or arising from or necessary or advisable for the Project and for the construction,
erection or affixation of any building or fixture thereon (hereinafter called “the
Project Building”) or for any demolition or earth clearance works thereon or for
Implementation Guide Implementation Guide
the removal of any soil thereon or therefrom and generally for the construction or
earthworks affecting in connection with, related to or arising from the Project and
to collect, receive and retain such licences, approval, permits or exemptions and to
give a good receipt or acknowledgement therefor.
2. To enter upon and take possession of the Land and to develop the Land for the
Project and to carry out all necessary building, engineering and other operations
on the Land to construct and complete the Project Building in accordance with
the planning permission, building plan approval and any other licences, approvals
or permits issued by any relevant competent authorities.
3. To apply for, obtain or secure all necessary governmental approvals, permits or
licences for the subdivision (including subdivision) of the Project Building.
4. To apply to the Registrar of Titles for the issue of separate condominium Certificates
of Title to the Project Building and for this purpose to sign, execute and lodge the
necessary applications at the land office.
5. To take and accept delivery of the duplicate condominium Certificates of Title or
other documents of title as soon as the same are issued by the Registrar of Titles
and to give good receipts therefor.
6. To deal with all other relevant government authorities for the purpose of negotiating
and obtaining the approval of any sale and purchase agreements entered or to be
entered into by the Attorney with any sub-purchaser in respect of the sale of the
Units as may be required under the law.
7. To sign any Caveats and Withdrawal of Caveats relating to the Land or Project
Building as the Attorney shall think fit and to register the said Caveats and
Withdrawal of Caveats with the Land Office.
8. To warn off and prohibit and if necessary proceed against in due form of law all
trespassers on the Land or the Project Building or any part thereof and to take
appropriate steps whether by action or otherwise to abate all nuisances.
9. To receive and give effectual receipts and discharges for all or any moneys which
shall or may come to the hands of the Attorney by virtue of the powers herein
contained which receipts shall exonerate the person or persons or corporation
paying such moneys from seeing to the application thereof or being responsible
for the loss or misapplication thereof.
10. To enter into and to sign, seal, execute and perfect as the Land Owner’s act and deed
and to deliver any contract, option, Sale and Purchase Agreement, conveyance,
11. To appear before any Registrar or other official appointed under any Act and
register any deed, assurance, contract, transfer or other document relating to the
Project and sale of the Units and to pay such fees and to complete any forms and
make any declaration which may be necessary for the registration thereof.
12. For the Land Owner and in his name to accept service of any writ of summons,
summons plaint, motion, petition or other legal process of any kind in respect of
the Project and sale of the Units and to appear and on the Land Owner’s behalf to
represent in any court and before all judges, magistrates or other judicial quasi-
judicial or administrative officers whosoever as the Attorney shall think fit.
Implementation Guide Implementation Guide
13. In connection with any of the foregoing to appoint and engage any Advocate to
act for the Land Owner on his behalf for any of the purposes of these presents.
IT IS HEREBY FURTHER DECLARED as follows-
(1) This Power of Attorney shall be irrevocable until the completion of the sale and
purchase of the Units in accordance with the terms of the Agreement.
(2) The powers and authorities hereinbefore given to the Attorney shall not be deemed
to be limited to such transactions and matters as are hereinbefore expressly
mentioned by name but are intended to and shall in all cases extend to all other
matters or transactions not hereinbefore precisely mentioned or defined which
may by the Attorney be deemed to be requisite and expedient to be done or
performed for the purposes of these presents.
AND THE LAND OWNER HEREBY RATIFIES AND CONFIRMS AND PROMISES at all times
to allow, ratify and confirm all and whatsoever the Attorney shall lawfully do or cause to
be done by virtue hereof including anything which shall be done before revocation of this
Deed and the Land Owner declares that as against him and persons claiming under him,
anything which the Attorney shall lawfully do or cause to be done in pursuance of this
Deed after such revocation as aforesaid shall be valid and effectual in favour of any person
claiming the benefit thereof and acting in good faith who before the doing thereof shall
not have had express notice of such revocation and the Land Owner hereby agrees to
indemnify the Attorney against costs, charges, expenses and losses which the Attorney
may incur in the lawful execution of the powers hereby conferred upon the Attorney.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF the parties have appended their signature this _____ day of
NAME OF LAND OWNER NAME OF THE ATTORNEY
I, …………………………………… an Advocate and Notary Public of the Republic of Uganda practising in
the Republic of Uganda hereby certify that on the _____day of ____________, the signature of
Katuramu Chrispus was duly affixed to the written instrument at Uganda in my presence.
Implementation Guide Implementation Guide
ANNEX 3: SAMPLE AGREEMENT IN RESPECT OF LAND ATTACHED
Implementation Guide Implementation Guide
Implementation Guide Implementation Guide
The Administration of Estates (Small Estates) (Special Provisions) (Probate and
In the Magistrate’s Court of Nakawa, Magisterial Area at Nakawa Administration Cause
and that administration of the property and credits of the deceased, and in any way
he or she having undertaken to administer the property and credits, and to make a
full and true inventory of the property and credits to this court within six months from
the date of this grant, or within such further time as the court may from time to time
appoint, and also to render to this court a true account of the property and credits
within one year from the same date, or within such further time as the court may from
Implementation Guide Implementation Guide
The Administration of Estates (Small Estates) (Special Provisions) (Probate and
administration (with or without the will annexed) of the property and credits of ...........................,
she having undertaken to administer the property and credits of the deceased, and to
make a full and true inventory of the property and credits to this court within six months
from the date of this grant or within such further time as the court may from time to time
appoint, and also to render to this court a true account of the property and credits within
one year from the same date, or within such further time as the court may from time to
Implementation Guide Implementation Guide
ANNEX 5: SCRUTINY OF ARCHITECTURAL PLANS
Title Block Check the title block for the following information:
S29, 33, 35 Architect: The title block should include the name of the Architect, their
registration number, his/her firm (if applicable), valid practicing certifi-
cate number, telephone and email contacts, the architect’s green stamp
signed and dated. These should be verified with the Architects Registra-
All work should be designed by the Architect. Any plan with information
to the contrary/contact information of any person other purporting to
have designed or drawn the work other than the Architect should be
Applicant: Name, Physical and Postal Address of the applicant. These
should be consistent with the details on the land title/proof of ownership
Land Owner: Incase the applicant is not the land owner, include the
name, physical and postal address of the land owner and a statement of
legal relationship between applicant and land owner
Project Description: This should include the category of development,
Property Description consistent with the land title/proof of ownership,
jurisdiction to which application is being made, district.
Scales: Check that scales and annotation used conform to the minimum
prescribed by the relevant regulation and that information is legible.
(a) Location Plan: (i) These shall provide adequate information to enable location of
the site without need for further directions. Longitude and Lat-
itudes as determined by Google Maps/ Google Earth are a rec-
(ii) The surveyor’s report required by the regulations shall include
coordinates of the plot/land based on a system prescribed by
the Commissioner Surveys and Mapping.
(iii) Where house numbers have been allocated by the local author-
ity, these maybe used to facilitate location of the property.
(iv) The North Arrow shall be clearly visible. Key landmarks should
(b) Context or Block Plan (i) Should reflect all spatial features within and around the site that
place constraints on the site and/or influence the design of the
(ii) Such features include, existing and neighbouring buildings, ex-
tents of road reserves and other utility easements affecting the
site, location of connection points for utilities, etc. as applicable
(iii) BCO to check that the site does not possess any characteris-
tics that make it a prohibited site and in case there are factors
that make the site risky for erection of a building that these have
P 104 (iv) BCO/BC to check that the site does not possess any character-
istics that make it a prohibited site and in case there are factors
that make the site risky for erection of a building that these have
(c) Site Plan (i) Site plans illustrate how the space available for development
on the site is to be utilised to provide a building that meets the
P 4 - 21, 60 Design Requirements in the Code, taking into account existing
constraints, and opportunities. A site plan shall therefore be
based on the information in the context plan.
Implementation Guide Implementation Guide
(ii) Check that subsoil drainage, control of buildings in swampy sites,
plot frontage, building line, plot coverage, space around and in
front of building, plot area, car parking, access to utilities, bound-
ary fencing, existing mature trees are in conformity to the Code
(iii) Base effective area of the plot excluding existing easements
affecting the land such as roads traversing the land, utility way
ing properties that have not been resolved. The net effective site
shall be of adequate size for the type and size of building devel-
P8, P12, Schedule 1 Table 1, P13- (iv) Site plans illustrate how the space available for development on
15, P114 the site is to be utilised to provide a building that meets the De-
sign Requirements in the Code, taking into account existing con-
straints, and opportunities. A site plan shall therefore be based
on the information in the context plan.
(v) The net effective site shall be of adequate size for the type and
(vi) The plan must show the outline of the buildings (extents) and
their shortest/perpendicular distance from each of the plot
boundaries as well as the distance between different buildings
on the same site to demonstrate compliance with setback and
(vii) The plot coverage should also be appropriate.
(viii) Confirm that these conform to the Development permission
granted as well as the minimum code standards
P25, P26, P30, P32, P38 (ix) Look out for any encroachments into the setbacks and ensure
they are acceptable elements and do not exceed maximum ac-
(x) The site plan shall show all existing mature trees and in case any
are to be cut, the rationale for cutting of any trees shall be clearly
explained and the location of new replacement trees to be plant-
(xi) Vehicular access and exit to the site as well as circulation within
the site shall be safe and practical and any ramps shall conform
to the minimum standards in the Code (SI 51)
(xii) Ensure that services and utilities for the building are proper-
P46 ly sited and that the building respects existing utility systems
(xiii) Site plan/s shall indicate the layout of the boundary wall, fence
or enclosure (unless need for one is waived by the BC) relative to
the plot boundaries and other constraining features
(xiv) Wherever boundary walls are required by the BC, the design
shall conform to the minimum standards prescribed in the Code
Implementation Guide Implementation Guide
(d) Floor Plans (i) Floor plans shall show the dimensions and purpose of every room or
NBC: Part III, (ii) It is recommended that the BC requires the applicant to declare the
design population for the entire building development for ease of
assessing adequacy of capacity of utilities/services to support the
expected population – which should be commensurate with the
floor space provided in the plans to avoid overcrowding.
(iii) Floor plans shall show the location and width of wall openings and
provide adequate information as to the type/purpose of the opening
to facilitate assessment of its appropriateness
P61, P91, P93, P94, P96, P97, (i) All rooms including auxiliary facilities shall conform to the minimum
P99, P102, P103, P106, P107 acceptable dimensions and floor area according to the occupancy
(ii) The maximum population that can be accommodated in the build-
ing (design population) shall be derived from the floor area and oc-
(iii) This capacity shall be the basis for sizing of related services such as
number of sanitary fittings and capacity of sewage treatment in-
(iv) Dimensions of steps and stairs shall be appropriate to the occupan-
cy and design population of the building
(v) Note that the provision of escalators in any building does not waive
the requirement for stairs
P41-42, P63, P68 (vi) Appropriate banisters and/or guarding shall be provided for safety
at stairs, balconies and other areas where there are changes in level
(vii) Large, multi-storey and multi-occupancy buildings shall be protect-
ed from fire and its effects, designed and divided in accordance with
the Code to maximise fire safety and be provided with appropriate
alternative means of escape in case of emergencies.
(viii) There shall be an adequate number of alternative egress means for
(ix) The location and distribution of such egress means as well as the
width of exits shall be in accordance with Code to ensure maximum
opportunity for safe and timely egress in emergencies
(x) Similarly, an adequate number of staircases or alternative means of
egress shall be provided commensurate with the height and capac-
ity of multi-storey buildings taking into account the capacity and
(xi) These shall be rationally distributed and provided with adequate
safety apparatus to mitigate fire spread while allowing for swift
(xii) Lifts systems shall be particularly protected against fire and its ef-
Accessibility standards Ensure that floor plans conform with accessibility standards in circula-
tion areas and sanitary facilities
Implementation Guide Implementation Guide
(e) Elevations (i) Elevations should be adequate in number to show all significant
(ii) Typical features shown in elevations are the walls, openings and
roof. Details of external finishes shall be indicated on the elevations
(f) Sections (i) Sections should be adequate in number and location to show all
the significant elements and limiting heights to facilitate judge-
ment of the appropriateness and performance of the design
(ii) Typical areas or features to be shown in sections include founda-
tions, walls, floors and beams, openings and the fixtures therein
(iii) Ensure that sections truly and accurately represent the area where
they are shown to have been cut on the floor plans.
P24, P28, P64, P70, P93(c), (iv) Check that heights of rooms meet the minimum standards for the
(v) Check headroom/clearances beneath beams, stairs and ramps to
P26, P39, P41, ensure adequacy as per code or for the purpose intended
(vi) Materials of the different building elements shall conform to Part
(vii) In case of second hand materials and scenarios were the suitability
of a material for purpose is unknown or in doubt, appropriate test
certificates shall be attached to the application
(g) Door & Window Sched- Lighting and Ventilation
(i) Buildings shall be lighted and ventilated in accordance with P111-P117
(ii) Use door and window schedules as well as information on the plans
to ascertain the adequacy of lighting and ventilation in various
(iii) Ensure effective/net glazed area of minimum 10% floor area for win-
P113 (1) dows of habitable rooms and note the necessary 5% incremental
glazed area increment where overhangs greater than 900mm (e.g.
(iv) Ensure a total openable area (for ventilation) of minimum 5% floor
area of the room served including the permanent ventilation open-
(v) Look out for windows with space opposite them that does not meet
P114 effective lighting and ventilation requirements and ensure such ar-
eas are corrected on the plans
(vi) Check that all soil water fitment spaces are adequately lit and ven-
(vii) In addition, check that effective cross ventilation has been provided
with the opening to room volume ratio as prescribed by Code
(viii) For public buildings, ensure the total unobstructed area of venti-
P116 lation openings divided by the occupancy capacity gives adequate
(ix) Ensure that the distribution of the openings in the walls and/or roof
will provide effective air flow for the occupants
Implementation Guide Implementation Guide
(h) Drainage plans: Storm, (i) Drainage plans shall be prepared in conformity with the National
Foul and Waste Water Building (Standards for Mechanical Installations in Buildings) Code,
2019 and The Public Health (Drainage and Sanitation) Rules.
(ii) Typical drainage features to be shown in the site plan include man-
holes, soil and waste pipes, connection to sewer or septic tank and
(iii) Drainage features to be shown on ground floor plans include man-
holes, gulley traps, soil pipes, soil vent pipes, rain water pipes
(i) Boundary Wall Plan and Boundary walls shall conform to Paragraphs 19 and 20 of the building
Environmental Consider- (i) Where the BC has adopted sustainable design practices, various pro-
ations visions of Part V of the Code may be applied to buildings.
(ii) Attention is specifically drawn to mandatory provisions of this part
for application especially in assessing site plans, floor plans, sections
Implementation Guide Implementation Guide
ANNEX 6A: SCRUTINY OF STRUCTURAL DRAWINGS (REINFORCED CONCRETE)
Basis of design (i) Based on ultimate & serviceability limit states
(ii) Based on most critical limit state and a check shall be
NBC, Part II, P 8(1), 8(2) conducted to ensure that the other limit states are not
Design approach (i) Idealization of the structural elements or the structure,
their connectivity and their load path;
NBC, Part II, Sec 11(1), 11(3) (ii) Design value shall be obtained by using the characteristic
or representative values in combination with partial and
(iii) Maintain the same code; Either E.C or B.S
Partial safety factors The design values shall be derived in accordance with Sched-
Self weight & Imposed Loads (i) General occupancy classes causing imposed loads shall
NBC, Part III, Sec 13(4) (ii) The minimum imposed loads for the occupancies re-
ferred to above are specified in Schedule 2.
Wind Loads Loads checked as per Schedule 3 & 4
General Lateral loading For high rise structures i.e. 6+ more storeys, lateral loading de-
sign i.e. earthquake & wind must be considered
Other Design Loads Check for Impact or vibrations producing dynamic loading,
lifting or handling equipment such as forklifts, trolleys or
NBC, Part III, Sec 15 cranes operating on the floors of buildings or lateral and up-
lift forces due to retained soils or ground water inertia sway
NBC, Part III, Sec 16(8) Natural stone, clay bricks, structural timber, structural steel,
concrete blocks and plain or reinforced concrete form the
main construction materials for the structures commonly re-
Material strengths Design strength characteristics should be provided as these
influence the components to be designed for as well as the
NBC, Part III, Sec 16(9) sizes and types of building structures involved.
Materials design values The partial factors of safety for the various reinforced con-
crete ingredients shall be as specified in Part II of Schedule 7.
Design properties & strength classes The design properties and strength classes for concrete,
including characteristic compressive strength of concrete for
NBC, Part V, Sec 22(10) the various grades are prescribed in Schedule 8.
Final deflection Final deflection of all horizontal members shall not, in gener-
Implementation Guide Implementation Guide
For roof or floor construction supporting The deflection which occurs after the attachment of the
or attached to non-structural elements non-structural elements shall not exceed the value
including partitions and finishes likely to
be damaged by a large deflection Deflection=Le/350. Which should also be less than or equal
calculated sag of a beam, slab or cantilever Shall not exceed span/250
(a) Excavation details Geotechnical report for any deep (2m and more depth) exca-
NBC, Part IV, Sec 17(2) Shall be at depths equal to or greater than 1.0 metre
General: Geotechnical engineering tests Geotechnical testing ensuring stability and safety of buildings
for; and a guide to the classification and bearing capacities of sub
2) Low rise large, developments and
3) Medium and High rise developments
General: Foundation types Foundation, footings or bases shall be strip footings, isolat-
NBC, Part IV, Sec 17(5) modified forms
General: Reinforced concrete Grades C12/15 if unreinforced, or C20/25 at 28 days if reinforced.
General: Concrete cover Cover to all reinforcement shall not be less than 50 mm.
General: Allowable bearing capacity Forces transmitted to the soils does not exceed the bearing
General: Deep excavations Geotechnical investigations shall be carried out before any
deep excavation is undertaken to determine the soil charac-
(More than 2m) teristics in order to design the most appropriate foundation
and footing for the building.
Isolated base depths depths of axially loaded unreinforced footings shall be equal
to or greater than 300 mm and the projections from the col-
NBC, Part IV, Sec 18(1) umns or faces shall not be less than the foundation thickness.
Minimum Base sizing Minimum pad size should be 1.0x1.0x0.3M
Isolated base designed depths and rebars The depth of the pads shall be determined in accordance
with Part I of Schedule 5 from which also reinforcement per-
NBC, Part IV, Sec 18(2) centages shall be obtained.
Isolated base design shear checks Shears at faces of columns shall be checked using the proce-
dure indicated in Part II of Schedule 5.
Strip footing design Designed as a pad footing in the transverse direction and
considering a linear meter in the longitudinal direction.
Raft foundation provision On soft natural ground or fill or on subsurface strata contain-
Implementation Guide Implementation Guide
Raft foundation design The design of raft foundations shall be analogous to that of
inverted flat slabs, with the column loads known.
Pile foundation design (i) Based on static load tests, empirical or analytical calcula-
tion methods, the results of dynamic load tests
NBC, Part IV, Sec 21(1-7) (ii) Designed as either friction or end bearing piles.
Design classifications Short or slender
Clear distance The clear distance between the end restraints of the col-
umns shall not exceed 60 x least dimension of the column
Axial forces calculated on the assumption that beams and slabs trans-
mitting forces are simply supported.
Short column design as described in Schedule 13.
Slender column design Shall be designed as short columns but account shall be
taken of additional moments induced in the columns by
NBC, Part V, Sec 27(6) deflection and that deflection for rectangular or circular col-
umns under ultimate conditions shall be represented by an
equation specified in Part I of Schedule 13.
Additional moments shall be added to the initial moments to give the maximum
moments for the ultimate limit state of the columns.
Symmetrically reinforced rectangular sec- shall be designed to withstand increased moments about
tions subjected to biaxial bending the axes given by the equations in Part II of Schedule 13.
Rebar areas shall be equal or greater than 0.4% but not more than 6% of
gross concrete area. At laps total percentage shall not exceed
Durability requirement shall be subjected to similar requirements as for reinforced
concrete walls, as provided in Part V of Schedule 14.
Fire resistance requirement As per Table 2 in Schedule 13
Effective depth ratios Shall be in accordance with Part I Schedule 12.
Limiting total deflections shall be span/360 or 20 mm whichever is lesser for spans up
Continuous beams, uniformly loaded with shall have design ultimate moments and shears represented
approximately equal spans by Part II of Schedule 12 except that the characteristic im-
posed loads shall not exceed the characteristic dead loads.
Minimum tension rebars As per code.
Implementation Guide Implementation Guide
Minimum Compression rebars As per code.
Durability requirements Shall in addition to the requirements of (f) fulfil the durability
requirements given in Part V of Schedule 14.
Sizing and fire resistance shall be sized to meet the fire resistance requirements given
(e) Beam-Column connections Beam re-bars to pass within the closed stirrup ring of the col-
Preferable to have wider columns than the beam widths to
minimize cranking of the beam re-bars.
Floor types Floors shall be reinforced concrete solid, ribbed (one way and
two way spanning e.g. waffle slabs) or hollow core block slabs
Effective depth Shall not exceed the limits specified in Schedule 10.
Solid concrete design Design as per the code requirements; effective depths, panel
Flat slab design For the design of flat slabs with at least three spans in both
directions and the longest span or shortest span ratio not
NBC, Part V, Sec 25(6) exceeding 1.2, Table 3 of Schedule 11, shall be applied to ob-
tain the bending moments and shear forces in the slabs and
columns except that for flat slabs, which do not meet these
conditions, the bending moments shall be calculated by
Ribbed slab characteristics Ribs shall be spaced a distance not more than 1.5 meters and
their depth less than 4 x width of ribs or 50 mm, whichever is
Fire resistance requirement shall have adequate depth and reinforcement cover to pro-
vide fire resistance according to Table 5 of Schedule 11.
NBC, Part V, Sec 24(2) Shall be considered as floor slabs subjected to imposed loads
applicable to the various occupancy classes as shown in
Inherent stability Against overturning, slidding, etc
height to thickness relationship of walls shall be specified in Part I of Schedule 14.
exposed to different wind pressures
Design strength of walls strength of walls per unit length shall be obtained from the
formula specified in Part II of Schedule 14.
Slenderness ratios of Plain concrete walls not more than 30, whether the walls are braced or unbraced.
Implementation Guide Implementation Guide
Effective heights shall be 0.75 x the distance between lateral supports in
cases where lateral supports resist both rotations and lateral
NBC, Part V, Sec 28(6) movements, or equal to the distances between centres of
supports in case where lateral supports resist only lateral
NBC, Part V, Sec 28(7) For unbraced walls under similar end-conditions as in (d),
the corresponding effective heights shall be obtained by
multiplying the distances between centers of supports with
Design load per unit length shall be assessed on the basis of linear distribution of loads
along the length of the wall, with no allowance for tensile
Shear wall design designed as vertical cantilevers that are continuous through-
out the height of the building.
Fire resistance requirement In accordance to Part IV of Schedule 14.
Durability requirement In accordance to Part V of Schedule 14
Rebar areas vertical reinforcement in walls shall not be less than 0.4% or
more than 4% of the gross sections of concrete for any unit
Vertical Bar spacing Limits shall not exceed 3 times the wall thickness or 400 mm
Horizontal Bar spacing Limits the spacing between two adjacent horizontal bars shall not
(i) Roof details R.c slabs can be provided as roofs over structures and there-
fore the slab details in (f) above can apply.
A smooth gentle slope should be provided to ensure drain-
ing away of rain water to a centralized drain off point.
NBC, Part V, Sec 29(1) Soils, fluids or a combination of both
Types of retaining walls cantilevered wall, buttressed wall, counterfort wall, propped
Form provided walls in (b) can take the form of gravity walls, masonry walls
or reinforced concrete walls depending on the main materi-
NBC, Part V, Sec 29(3) als used in their construction.
Design consideration (a) function and the consequences of failure,
NBC, Part V, Sec 29(6) (b) stability of the wall (bearing resistance and resistance
(c) economy (consider an economical cross section per unit
(e) mechanism of transmitting compressive and shearing
loads to the foundation and the reaction of the foundation to
(f) secondary effects of the foundation behaviour on the
Implementation Guide Implementation Guide
ANNEX 6B: SCRUTINY OF STRUCTURAL DRAWINGS (STEEL)
Forms be either a single member or an assembly of a number of steel
Design considerations To facilitate fabrication, erection and future maintenance of the
Profiles Structural steel to be hot or cold rolled sections of the following
NBC, Part VI, Sec 30(3) Z-sections, angles, flat bars, plates, or other approved profiles
Standards of conformity to conform to Uganda Standard US ISO 630-2: 2011, Structural
Steel grades General steel grades 43, 50 and 55 used for structural steelwork
and to have minimum corresponding design strength specified
NBC, Part VI, Sec 30(5) in Part I of Schedule 15
Applications stanchions, beams and joists, trusses, purlins, side rails, portal
NBC, Part VI, Sec 30(6) pylons, towers and bridges.
(a) Excavation details Geotechnical report for any deep (2m and more depth) excava-
(b) Foundation details Column bases shall be of sufficient size, stiffness and strength
to transmit the axial load, bending moments and shear forces in
columns to their foundations or other support, without exceed-
ing the load carrying capacity of such supports.
The nominal bearing pressure between the base plate and the
support may be determined on the basis of a linear distribution
For concrete foundations, the bearing strength may be taken
as, 0.4fcu where fcu is the characteristic concrete strength at 28
Design approach Columns designed as single integral members provided that
the main components are effectively restrained against buck-
NBC, Part VI, Sec 32(1-7) ling designed to safely transmit axial loads, bending moments
and shear to the foundations
Base plate thickness base plates loaded concentrically by I, H, Channel, Box or RHS
columns shall be given by the equation specified in Part III of
Encased column consideration As per the code
Limiting deflection values shall be;
NBC, Part VI, Sec 31(2) (a) length/180, for cantilever beams,
(b) span/360, for beams carrying brittle finishes; and
Shear forces shall be limited by the relationship specified in Part II of Sched-
Moment capacities shall be determined in Part II of Schedule 15.
Implementation Guide Implementation Guide
Design approach designed on the basis of a realistic assumption of the distribu-
Partial factor of safety shall be taken as;
NBC, Part VI, Sec 33(3) (a) for resistance of bolted connections gMb = 1.25
(b) resistance of riveted connections gMr = 1.25
(c) resistance of pin connections gMp = 1.25
(d) resistance of welded connections gMw = 1.25
(e) resistance of net sections at bolted holes gM2 = 1.25
Bolt and rivet connections As per the code
Pin connections As per the code
Splice connections As per the code
Welded connections As per the code
Beam to column connections designed by the generally known and acceptable application
rules and practices by engineers ensuring the connection is
NBC, Part VI, Sec52(1 & 2) able to transfer the stresses from the beam to the column.
Column bases baseplate size determined either by effective area method or
Connection of base plates welds or fasteners shall be provided to transmit all forces and
Anchor bolts design approach designed to resist the effect of the design loads and shall
provide resistance to tension due to uplift forces, and bending
NBC, Part VI, Sec59(1) moments and shear, where appropriate
Anchoring anchor bolts shall either be anchored into the foundation by a hook or by
a washer plate or by some other appropriate load distribution
NBC, Part VI, Sec59(3) member embedded in the concrete.
(f) Slab details Steel structures can be provided with r.c slabs, steel framed
slabs/platforms (either mesh or full chequered plate grating) or
it can be with composite slabs (combination of concrete and
steel) supporting system is primarily steel beams.
(g) Staircases Fabricated as a quarter turn, half turn ( having flights) or spiral
staircase traversing a central steel element post from one level
Quarter or full turn staircase should have edge stringer beams
to receive fabricated treads and hand rails.
Spiral staircases should have a rigid central steel post element
strong enough to withstand induced stresses as people move
Implementation Guide Implementation Guide
(h) Lift wells Void provisions in the slabs should be made to allow provision of
Size of void to be recommended by specialist lift suppliers and
Framed columns and beams at every level strong enough to
withstand stresses induced from the lift movements up and
Forms shall be constituted by any or combination of among others;
Loading considered designed to sustain the dead loads, imposed loads and wind
recommended minimum roof specified in Part V of Schedule 15.
slopes for the various structures and
Design approach designed to sustain axial, compression or tension forces or com-
binations of the loadings acting on the trusses.
Structural steel truss spacing not exceeding 6.0m with double or mono pitches in accordance
Purlins design (1) shall be designed for imposed loads not less than 0.50kN/
m2 and shall normally have spans L not exceeding 6.0 meters
NBC, Part VI, Sec 62 (1-3) center to center of the main supports.
(2) The dimension D, perpendicular to the planes of the clad-
ding, and the dimension B, parallel to planes of the cladding
shall be as specified in Part IV of Schedule 15 for different sec-
(3) The empirical values of purlins are specified in Part IV of
Composite beams shall be checked for resistance for lateral-torsional buckling,
shear buckling and longitudinal shear.
Composite columns checked for the compression resistance, local buckling and
shear between the steel and the concrete.
(j) Retaining structure details Steel vertical retaining sheets supported by steel raked mem-
Designed and checked for stability against sliding &structural
Implementation Guide Implementation Guide
ANNEX 6C: SCRUTINY OF STRUCTURAL DRAWINGS (WOOD)
Type structural timber to be organic of either hard or soft wood
Applications for roof construction as; trusses, joists, purlins and battens,
Considered strength classes SG4, SG8, SG12 and SG16 as per schedule 16. Strength classes
SG8 and SG12 are recommended for building construction.
Spans not greater than 10.0m with single or double pitches in accor-
dance with Part V of Schedule 15.
NBC, Part VII, Sec 66(2) For spans exceeding 10.0m, the designer must carry out a de-
tailed structural analysis to determine the appropriate timber
sections and means of enhancing rigidity of the assembly, or
adopt more rigid materials such as structural steel.
Elaboration on spanning (a) 1.80 metres: for roofs with metal sheets;
NBC, Part VII, Sec 66(4) (b) 1.80 metres: for roofs with concrete/clay tiles, incorporating
common rafters spaced at 0.60 metres, centre to centre; and
(c) 2.10 metres: for roofs with metal tiles, incorporating common
Connetions shall be firmly secured with either nails, screws, bolts and/or
Purlins provision shall have a minimum dimension of 75 x 50 mm and shall be
spaced at distances not exceeding 1.20 metres centre to centre.
Implementation Guide Implementation Guide
ANNEX 6D: SCRUTINY OF STRUCTURAL DRAWINGS (MASONRY)
Load bearing clay bricks shall conform to Uganda Standard US 102:1995, Standard speci-
fication for burnt clay bricks.
Load bearing concrete blocks shall be solid blocks with characteristic compressive strength
Natural stone as load bearing ma- Natural stone shall be classified as unreinforced masonry for
sonry the purpose of its structural use as a material in the building
Implementation Guide Implementation Guide
ANNEX 7: SCRUTINY OF ELECTRICAL DRAWINGS
The Electrical Code must be read together with other docu-
ments which it makes cross-reference to including:
• National Information Technology Authority Act, 2009, Act
The circuit and layout design drawings should employ NBRB
approved electrical symbols and conventions. Any non-standard
symbols should be explained in the Key Electrical drawings shall
be signed off by a qualified electrical engineer.
Description of Electrical Loads For buildings in Category A, the electrical engineer shall submit
a “Description of Electrical Loads” This shall include
• Utility power connection for single phase load, three
• Heating, Ventilation and Air Conditioning (HVAC) re-
• Electrically operated accessories (gates, pumps etc)
(a) mains and standby power sup- This shall form part of the electrical circuit drawing
Evaluate aspects such as extending utility power to site, over-
4,5, 14, 34, 35, 39-49, Schedule 3 head utility line clearances, space for transformers and related
switchgear, citing of standby power equipment, green standby
(b) power reticulation; This shall complete the electrical circuit drawing
look out for electrical ducts, lift power supplies, power rooms(
sizes and locations) ,transformer room, generator houses or
canopies ( taking into account noise pollution), earthing and
Ratings of isolators and breakers, conduct sizes may be speci-
(c) lighting layout; This shall be shown on the architectural drawing and shall show
position of light fixtures and lighting switches
(d) small power layout; This shall be shown on the architectural drawing and shall show
- power socket outlets, distribution board, hot water
- Security elements e.g. alarm keypad and intercom hand
(e) fire protection; Power requirements shall be shown on the electrical circuit
Positioning of the fire fighting elements including sprinklers
and smoke detectors will be shown on the fire protection layout
Implementation Guide Implementation Guide
(f) private automatic branch ex- Power requirements shall be shown on the electrical circuit
Positioning of the communication sockets will be shown on the
small power layout drawing
(g) local area data network (struc- Power requirements shall be shown on the electrical circuit
P68 Positioning of the data sockets will be shown on the small pow-
(h) closed circuit television (CCTV). Power requirements shall be shown on the electrical circuit
Positioning of the cameras and security room will be shown on
the small power layout drawing
Implementation Guide Implementation Guide
ANNEX 8: SCRUTINY OF MECHANICAL DRAWINGS
General requirements The drawings shall contain the following where applicable:
stairways, ramps, guards & lifts (esp. for raised buildings); light-
ing, ventilation (all types); heating, fire safety (esp. for public
buildings), plumbing, sanitary fitments & drainage works
(those with piped water), firefighting, water supply, reticula-
Building methods and materials Those proposed should be the ones approved by the BC, oth-
erwise permission has to be sought
(a) water supply; Water supply drawings shall include the position of the water
meter, water tank and pipe work (on site layout) and dispens-
• Check for the placement of water meters on the premises;
• Any source of supply from underground sources shall be
approved by the Authority (proof shall be produced)
water supply to be separate. Portable (drinking) water
Table 5 (Schedule 1); Table 8-10 should not be from unsealed (those which are not cov-
• Check that the proposed storage of water ensures uninter-
• There should be steady and stable supply; the proposed
storage capacity should be equivalent to the building oc-
(d) ventilation and air conditioning; Ventilation and Air Conditioning drawings shall be prepared
for centralized systems and shall show movement of ducts and
NBC, Part IV, Sec89-93 centralized air conditioning unit.
• Air-conditioning or artificial ventilations systems should
be included on buildings especially public and proper ma-
• There should also be adequate duct openings, coverings
and lining in the designs
(e) drainage; Drainage plans shall show sanitary fitments, plumbing and
• Sanitary fitments should be in relation with planned oc-
- Water closets, showers, urinals & la- • Septic tanks and cesspools should be properly situated on
trine fitments the premises, well-constructed with approvals from NWSC
NBC, Part III, Sec 24-26 • Their capacity should be in line with the planned building
- Septic tanks and cesspools
(f) fire fighting. Fire fighting drawings shall show the fire fighting plumbing,
• Check designs - for safety of occupants and users in case
Implementation Guide Implementation Guide
Lifts; Lift drawings shall show the lift shaft, lift control room, ma-
chine and pulley rooms
• All buildings 15 m or more above the ground shall have
lifts; lift installation and selection shall follow ISO 4190
parts 1 to 6. The lift construction shall comply with section
• Machine & pulley rooms for lifts - should be easily accessi-
ble, have adequate size and the door should be clear from
Implementation Guide Implementation Guide
Implementation Guide Implementation Guide
5.4 CIVIL AND STRUCTURAL WORKS IN CLASS A, B AND C BUILDINGS ......20
6.1.1 MECHANICAL INSTALLATIONS IN CLASS A AND B BUILDINGS .............26
6.2.1 ELECTRICAL INSTALLATIONS IN CLASS A, B AND C BUILDINGS ......30
Implementation Guide Implementation Guide
1.6 Expected Completion Date of Project
1.7 Date of Approval of Building Plans
1.8 Is approval of building plans still valid? (Tick as Yes No
(Give a brief description of the project and its purpose)
2.1 Class of Building (Refer to Annex 1). (Tick as ap- Class A
2.3 Type of Construction New works
Implementation Guide Implementation Guide
c) Civil and Structural Engineer
Implementation Guide Implementation Guide
b) Foreman for Civil and Structural Works
c) Foreman for Mechanical Works
d) Foreman for Electrical Works
e) Foreman for ICT Works
f) Health and Safety Officer
Implementation Guide Implementation Guide
4.1 BUILDING ARCHITECTURE FOR CLASS A AND B BUILDINGS
OUTCOMES Acceptable √ Unacceptable UNC Improvement IMP Not N/V Not
Condition Condition Recommended Verified Applicable
f) Construction Drawings and Specifications
k) ARB Project License Plate
n) Copies of relevant building codes
q) Site Health and Safety Policy
u) Site Meeting and Inspection Reports
b) Operations confined within site boundaries.
c) Site signboard location, complete building team members contact de-
4.1.2.3 Hoardings to be Erected During Building Operations (P55, NBC Building
4.1.2.4 Special Hoarding (P56, NBC Building Standards)
a) Application to Building Committee for building works with barricade or
hoarding on part of street or public way.
b) Proper lighting of barricade/hoarding from sunset to sunrise.
c) Conformity with Building Committee requirements.
e) Consent from Electricity company/ministry for site works nearer than 7
feet to any overhead electric line.
4.1.2.5 Advertisements on Hoardings (P58, NBC Building Standards)
e) Security personnel accommodation compliance with public health, and
Implementation Guide Implementation Guide
OUTCOMES Acceptable √ Unacceptable UNC Improvement IMP Not N/V Not
Condition Condition Recommended Verified Applicable
4.1.3.3 Control of Buildings in Swampy Sites (P6, NBC Building Standards)
c) Reinforcement of pit latrine walls
4.1.3.5 Building Lines (P8, NBC Building Standards)
4.1.3.6 Access to Lanes and Passages (P9, NBC Building Standards)
4.1.3.7 Paving and Gates to Passages (P10, NBC Building Standards)
4.1.3.8 Paving and Draining of Yards (P11, NBC Building Standards)
4.1.3.9 Plot Coverage (P12, NBC Building Standards)
4.1.3.10 Building Setbacks (P13-P15, NBC Building Standards)
4.1.3.12 Access to Utilities (P18, NBC Building Standards)
4.1.3.13 Boundary Fencing (P19-P20, NBC Building Standards)
c) Hazardous substance or activity containment within building curtilage.
d) Use of indigenous flora and local materials.
e) Parking provided within site boundaries.
Implementation Guide Implementation Guide
OUTCOMES Acceptable √ Unacceptable UNC Improvement IMP Not N/V Not
Condition Condition Recommended Verified Applicable
a) Conformity with neighbouring buildings
ii. Pavement width beneath canopy
vi. Conformity with existing canopies
4.1.5.4 Balconies and Bay Windows Overhanging Streets (P38-P39, NBC Building
a) Doors and windows not to open outwards.
Implementation Guide Implementation Guide
OUTCOMES Acceptable √ Unacceptable UNC Improvement IMP Not N/V Not
Condition Condition Recommended Verified Applicable
b) Separate access from upper floors
h) Width of door opening to landing
i) Variation in riser dimensions and tread goings
• Distance from narrower end of tread
• Horizontal angle between successive risers
• Variation in goings and riser dimensions
m) Multiple dwellings and warehouses with less than 10 employees
n) Warehouse buildings with more than 10 employees
4.1.5.6 Bannisters of Balconies and Stairways (P43, NBC Building Standards)
e) Spacing of bannisters for stairways and balconies
f) Safe infilling below handrails
• above nosing at staircase rake and
i) Provision of central handrail where stairway exceeds 2.4 m width
l) Stairway materials fire safety compliance
4.1.5.7 Pedestrian guarding for siting. P44 NBC Building Standards
Exceptions: Ramps used for vehicle access and loading bays.
4.1.5.8 Vehicle Barriers (P45, NBC Building Standards NBS)
Implementation Guide Implementation Guide
OUTCOMES Acceptable √ Unacceptable UNC Improvement IMP Not N/V Not
Condition Condition Recommended Verified Applicable
• Distance from street boundary
c) Pedestrians and vehicle ramp
4.1.5.10 Staircases in Buildings Intended for Separate Occupation (P47, NBC Build-
• Lighting at storey above ground
4.1.5.12 Enclosure and Position of Lifts and Motor Rooms (P50, NBC Building Stan-
b) Lift shaft smoke outlet position, area and fitting materials.
d) Domestic and public buildings lift enclosure materials.
b) Clear space between lift shaft bottom and lowest point of cage floor.
c) Lift shaft pit bottom conditions.
4.1.6 PRECAUTIONS AGAINST FIRE (P52, NBC Building Standards)
e) Fire resisting stairs and staircases
h) Refuse bin site floor finish and walling
i) Roofing and Draining of refuse bin sites
a) Platforms and gangways scaffolding width and height.
b) Toe boards and guard rails on open sides.
c) Building committee assessment of damage risk to persons and property.
d) Scaffolding above 6m height constructed in approved steel.
b) Position of main floor in relation to level of exit street.
4.1.8.2 Sites Safety (P60, NBC Building Standards)
b) Protection against fire from adjacent properties.
c) Building Committee prohibition on use of defective structure.
Implementation Guide Implementation Guide
OUTCOMES Acceptable √ Unacceptable UNC Improvement IMP Not N/V Not
Condition Condition Recommended Verified Applicable
4.1.8.3 Area per Person (P61, NBC Building Standards)
4.1.8.4 Fire Resistance Ratings (P62, NBC Building Standards)
4.1.8.5 Floors and Slope of Floors (P63, NBC Building Standards)
b) Passage and Aisle steps dimensions
4.1.8.6 Height of Galleries (P64, NBC Building Standards)
a) Clear height of first floor or balcony extending over pit, stalls or area.
b) Height between floor of the highest [part of the gallery and lowest part of
the ceiling over the part.
4.1.8.7 Width of Aisles P65 NBC Building Standards
4.1.8.8 Gangway Around Auditorium (P66, NBC Building Standards NBS)
4.1.8.9 Pit Floor (P67, NBC Building Standards)
4.1.8.10 Stairs in Assembly Buildings (P68, NBC Building Standards)
4.1.8.11 Planning of Lobbies (P69, NBC Building Standards)
4.1.8.12 Stage Space (P70, NBC Building Standards)
b) Panic bolts and locks on doors.
b) Separate exits for each level.
Efficient lighting all the time during whole period of use for:
e) other means of approach to public room or building.
4.1.8.17 Artificial Lighting (P84, NBC Building Standards)
a) Ensure no darkness in building in the event of accident or power break-
b) Two separate systems of electric lighting from two separate supply
c) All exit lamps remain lit during building use by public.
Implementation Guide Implementation Guide
OUTCOMES Acceptable √ Unacceptable UNC Improvement IMP Not N/V Not
Condition Condition Recommended Verified Applicable
4.1.8.18 Means of Warning and Escape (P85, NBC Building Standards)
b) Appropriate means of escape from building to safety place outside the
c) Safety place is safely and effectively used at all times.
4.1.8.19 Internal Fire Spread (P85, NBC Building Standards)
a) Internal wall lining adequately resists fire spread over its surface(Fire Rat-
b) If ignited internal lining has reasonable fire growth rate or heat release
4.1.8.20 Temporary Proscenia (P86, NBC Building Standards)
d) Fire resistance treatment of scenery curtain and temporary proscenium.
a) Cinematograph equipment (P87, NBC Building Standards)
4.1.8.22 Owner to cover costs of alterations or additions required by notice issued un-
der the Building Code P88, NBS NBC Building Standards.
4.1.9.1 Offices in Shops (P89, NBC Building Standards)
a) Lighting for shop part used as office to be according to Code 111 & 117.
4.1.9.2 Offices in Industrial Buildings (P90, NBC Building Standards)
a) Lighting for factory or workshop part used as an office to be as per Code
b) Building Committee exemption on parts considered to be adequately lit
4.1.9.3 Size of Rooms in Industrial Buildings (P91, NBC Building Standards)
a) Floor area according to Table 4, Schedule 1.
Further Requirements (P92, NBC Building Standards)
a) Provided more than 20 persons work in shops and offices at any one
time, provisions for public buildings and assembly buildings design ap-
ply as stated in Codes 59, 60 and 63-66 to the shops and office buildings.
4.1.9.4 Division of a Large Multipurpose Building (P40, NBC Building Standards)
a) Classroom dimensions to suit number of learners intended for the room.
d) Measurements as per design population standards in Schedule 1, Table 4.
Minimum 0.5 m2 floor space per learner.
4.1.10.3 Lighting and Ventilation (P95, NBC Building Standards)
a) Classroom lighting in accordance with Code 112 &113.
b) Classroom ventilation in accordance with code 115 & 116.
Implementation Guide Implementation Guide
OUTCOMES Acceptable √ Unacceptable UNC Improvement IMP Not N/V Not
Condition Condition Recommended Verified Applicable
4.1.10.4 Accommodation for Boarders (P96, NBC Building Standards)
a) Suitable and sufficient dormitories in addition to classrooms for every
b) Separate dormitories for each gender.
c) Minimum floor area per learner as per Schedule 1, Table 4 considering
2.78 m2 for learners under 12 years of age.
d) 3.7 m2 for each learner where double decker beds are used.
e) Beds placed at least 300 mm from dormitory walls.
f) Distance between adjacent beds not less than 1100 mm.
g) Unobstructed passage of at least 1100 mm in dormitory with two or more
h) Bed fabrication to ease regular disinfestation.
i) Dormitory lighting in accordance with Code 111 & 112.
j) Dormitories with secure, sufficient and accessible latrines and showers.
4.1.10.5 Accommodation for Meals (P97, NBC Building Standards)
a) Separate accommodation required for meals.
b) Dining area not to communicate with dormitory except via properly ven-
c) 0.75 m2 area per learner using dining.
4.1.10.6 Kitchens and Water Supply (P98, NBC Building Standards)
Kitchen required for every boarding establishment.
b) Sufficient water supply for washing and bathing of users.
c) Sufficient supply of wholesome drinking water always.
d) Accessible, uncontaminated water supply where no piped water supply
4.1.10.7 Latrine Accommodation (P99, NBC Building Standards)
Proper and sufficient latrine units mandatory for all schools.
a) Latrine to learner ratios according to types.
a. WCs, 1:15 persons for boarding facilities or 1:25.
b. WCs for non-boarding facilities up to 100 persons, 1:40 for above 100
i. 1:12 for boarding facilities and
i. 50% reduction in male latrines where latrines are provided,
iii. 560 mm channel length for every 25 males.
b) Schools with both boarding and non-boarding learners.
c) Separate latrines for learners of each gender.
d) Separate latrines for staff, for each gender.
e) Privacy and effective screening of latrines of each gender from the other.
f) 18 m maximum distance of dormitory from latrine.
g) 45 m maximum distance of classroom from latrine.
Impervious floors with every part regularly cleanable.
Open space of sufficient size required and where possible adjacent to every
school for playground use by learners.
4.1.11.1 Size of Rooms Intended to be Used as Dwellings (P102, NBC Building Stan-
a) Superficial area of habitable room at least 9 m2.
b) Area per person at least 3.7 m2, except:
i. at least 7.4 m2 for additional habitable rooms and
Implementation Guide Implementation Guide
OUTCOMES Acceptable √ Unacceptable UNC Improvement IMP Not N/V Not
Condition Condition Recommended Verified Applicable
4.1.11.2 Provision of Kitchens, Stores and Bathrooms for each Dwelling (P103, NBC
a) Kitchen area not less than 7.4 m2 and height of 2.6 m.
b) Hotel kitchen meets size parameters in Schedule 1.
c) Outside kitchen at least 2.3 m2 and 2.6 m high.
f) Refuse disposal and drainage means.
g) Size of cupboard more than 2.8 m3 to be provided lighting.
h) Bathroom size at least 1.5 m2 and 2.4 m mean height and not less than
i) Sufficient bathroom lighting as per Code 111 & 113.
4.1.11.3 Position of Blocks of Flats and Hotels (P104, NBC Building Standards)
a) Plots should be approved by Building Committee where no zoning exists.
b) Number of blocks of flats permitted on the plot.
c) Effect of residential plot development on adjoining residential plots.
4.1.11.4 Construction of Buildings of More than Two Storeys (P105, NBC Building
b) Access to building for public services required.
c) Drainage of waste, foul and storm water required.
d) Additional escape means and refuse disposal via secondary staircase
e) Location of central sites for refuse containers.
f) Construction of refuse sites with impervious floor, approved roofing,
4.1.11.5 Kitchens in Flats (P106, NBC Building Standards)
Code 103 (2)(a) and (e) not applicable to communal dining and catering.
4.1.11.6 Facilities to be Provided for all Residential Rental Premises Tenants (P107,
b) Lighting in all common circulation areas.
f) Waste and foul water drainage.
4.1.12.1 Provision of Windows (P111, NBC Building Standards)
4.1.12.2 Area of Windows (P113, NBC Building Standards)
4.1.12.3 Space Opposite Windows (P114, NBC Building Standards)
4.1.12.4 Window and Ventilation Requirements for Soilwater Fitting Apartments
4.1.12.5 Ventilation of Rooms (P116, NBC Building Standards)
4.1.12.6 Ventilation of Public Buildings (P117, NBC Building Standards)
4.1.12.7 Warehouse Lighting and Ventilation (P112, NBC Building Standards NBS)
4.1.13.1 General Requirements (P118, NBC Building Standards)
4.1.13.3 Second-hand Material (P120, NBC Building Standards)
Implementation Guide Implementation Guide
OUTCOMES Acceptable √ Unacceptable UNC Improvement IMP Not N/V Not
Condition Condition Recommended Verified Applicable
4.1.13.4 Other Standards (P121, NBC Building Standards)
4.1.13.5 Water Quality (P122, NBC Building Standards)
4.1.13.6 Sand or Fine Aggregate (P123, NBC Building Standards)
4.1.13.7 Coarse Aggregate (P124, NBC Building Standards)
4.1.13.9 Bricks and Blocks (P126, NBC Building Standards)
4.1.13.10 Stresses in Brick and Block Walling (P127, NBC Building Standards)
b) Special materials test results
b) Variational mix ratio authorised by competent person and approved by
c) Presence of ash, slag, clinker or similar material in concrete.
d) Coke breeze not authorised as ingredient.
e) Results of Bearing Pressures on load bearing concrete.
4.1.13.13 Slenderness Ratio of Pier (P130, NBC Building Standards)
4.1.13.14 Stresses in Wrought and Cast Iron (P131, NBC Building Standards)
e) Protection from insects and vermin
g) Stress Test Results on timber columns
h) Special timber Stress Test Results
i) Timber column lengths not to exceed thirty times its diameter
4.1.13.16 Damp-Proof and Anti-proof Courses (P137, NBC Building Standards)
c) Ability to withstand wall loads and prevent wall movement
4.1.14 INSPECTION OF BUILDING WORKS STAGES
Implementation Guide Implementation Guide
OUTCOMES Acceptable √ Unacceptable UNC Improvement IMP Not N/V Not
Condition Condition Recommended Verified Applicable
• 14 days prior for demolitions
• 7 days prior for new works
• 7 days prior for maintenance works
c) Approved drawings copy on site
4.1.15 DESIGN AND PLANNING OF BUILDINGS
4.1.15.1 BUILDING OPERATIONS BY MINISTRIES, DEPARTMENTS AND AGENCIES
• Design meets functional goals
• Considers whole life cycle cost
Implementation Guide Implementation Guide
OUTCOMES Acceptable √ Unacceptable UNC Improvement IMP Not N/V Not
Condition Condition Recommended Verified Applicable
• Certificates of service installations fitness
Implementation Guide Implementation Guide
4.2 BUILDING ARCHITECTURE FOR CLASS C BUILDINGS
OUTCOMES Acceptable √ Unacceptable UNC Improvement IMP Not N/V Not
Condition Condition Recommended Verified Applicable
(Use codes above. Pro- QUERY REC-
vide comment where TIFIED (Y/N)
4.2. 1 Temporary Buildings (P53, NBC Building Standards)
i. Layout drawings clearly indicating structure dimensions, plot bound-
ary lines, roads, sidewalks, distances to adjacent structures, public ac-
cess route building location, room locations and names.
iv. Construction materials and their fire ratings.
e) Certificate of Satisfactory Structural Condition
BCR - Building Control Regulations
NBC - National Building Code
Implementation Guide Implementation Guide
5.0 CIVIL AND STRUCTURAL WORKS
5.1 CODES OF PRACTICE AND STANDARDS
In the design and supervision of the buildings, it is incumbent on the professional to state
the approved codes of practice and standards he used. For purpose of this booklet, he is
• The National Building Code 2019,
• The Standards by the Uganda National Bureau of Standards marked as US or US-
ISO and other marks and
• any approved and relevant documents in practice, such as the British Standards.
It is incumbent on the professional to specify the elements designed for, such as rein-
forced concrete; steel and other metals; masonry and clay products; timbers, composite
The design and supervision must include all structural elements which must be added in
case they are not indicated in this booklet.
It is incumbent on the professional to prepare a design report which must include desir-
able aspects of professional structural design that ensures strength, safety and econo-
i) achieves an acceptable level of probability that it shall perform satisfactorily
ii) sustains all loads and deformations of normal construction and use and
iii) affords adequate durability and resistance to the effects of misuse and fire.
b) The design ensures that due regard is given to economy in design, structural safety,
c) The design ensures that the building is designed and constructed in such a way that
it is not unreasonably susceptible to damage by effects of fire, explosion, im-
d) The design ensures there is use of suitable materials. It should indicate need for qual-
ity control and good supervision, which are complementary to design calculations to
produce safe, serviceable and durable structures.
e) The design should provide specifications, standards for materials, production, work-
manship, maintenance aspects to be complied with and ensure that the design ob-
f) The report should show how the design has assured that potential damage is avoided
by appropriate choice of one or more of the following:
i) avoiding, eliminating or reducing the hazards to which the structure can be sub-
Implementation Guide Implementation Guide
ii) selecting a structural form which has low sensitivity to hazards considered,
iii) selecting a structural form and design that can survive adequately the acciden-
tal removal of an individual member or a limited part of the structure, or the
iv) avoiding, as far as possible, structural systems that can collapse without warning
v) tying the structural members together.
f) The design report shall show that the structural design is/was based on the most
critical limit state (either the ultimate limit state or the serviceability limit state)
and a check should be included to show that the other limit state was not exceeded.
g) The ultimate limit states used shall show how the following have been achieved:
i) safety of the people and
ii) safety of the structure and its contents.
h) The ultimate limit state design shall show how the building/structure will
i) loss of equilibrium of the structure or any part of it, considered as a rigid body,
ii) failure by excessive deformation, transformation of the structure or any part of it,
iii) failure caused by fatigue and other time dependent effects and
iv) failure caused by the effect of earthquakes, segmental and overall robustness of
i) The serviceability limit states shall show how the building/structure will as-
i) the functioning of the structure or structural members under normal use,
ii) the comfort of people and
iii) the appearance of the construction works.
j) The serviceability limit states shall show how the building/structure will
i) deformation and displacements which affect the appearance or effective use of
the structure or cause damage to finishes or non-structural elements,
ii) vibrations which cause discomfort to people, damage to the structure or to the
materials it supports, or which limit its functional effectiveness,
iii) damage, including cracking, which is likely to affect appearance, durability or
the function of the structure adversely,
iv) observable damage caused by fatigue and other time dependent effects and
k) The design report shall show the design philosophy that includes or fulfills:
i) idealisation of the structural elements or the structure, their connectivity and
ii) boundary conditions that are to be imposed onto the structure and to the indi-
Implementation Guide Implementation Guide
v) probability of change of use of the structure,
vi) determining which method of analysis or analysis software is suitable,
vii) determining which method of design or design checks to adopt,
viii) method of construction likely to be used and
ix) the temporary works and quality of workmanship to be used.
l) The design report shall show how the limit state design was carried out by:
i) setting up structural and load models for relevant ultimate and serviceability
limit states that should consider the various design situations and load cases
ii) verifying that the limit states are not exceeded when design values for actions,
material properties and geometrical data are used in the models.
m) The design report shall show how a design value was obtained:
i) by using the characteristic or representative values in combination with partial
ii) in exceptional cases, directly except that the values obtained directly should
correspond to at least the same degree of reliability for the various limit states.
5.4 CIVIL AND STRUCTURAL WORKS IN CLASS A, B AND C BUILDINGS
OUTCOMES Acceptable √ Unacceptable UNC Improvement IMP Not Not
Condition Condition Recommended Verified Applicable
5.4.1 PRECONSTRUCTION DRAWINGS AND DOCUMENTS
5.4.1.1 a) Approved civil and structural engineering plans, drawings and dia-
grams Geotechnical Survey Report
c) Structural design report with calculations to prove adequate
strength, safety and economy in all the structural elements
d) Excavation Plan where applicable
e) Detailed methodology for temporary support, where needed
f) Specifications covering all civil and structural works
5.4.2.1 Civil or Structural engineering plans, drawings and diagrams shall contain
5.4.2.2 Civil or Structural engineering plans, drawings and diagrams shall be drawn
5.4.2.3 Correct interpretation of Civil or Structural engineering plans, drawings and
5.4.2.4 Works executed in accordance with the designed and approved plans
Implementation Guide Implementation Guide
OUTCOMES Acceptable √ Unacceptable UNC Improvement IMP Not Not
Condition Condition Recommended Verified Applicable
5.4.3 STRUCTURAL SYSTEM OF THE BUILDING
5.4.3.1 Appropriate structural forms, systems and materials used in different parts
of the building e.g. reinforced concrete, pre-stressed concrete, steel, masonry
5.4.3.2 Identification of critical structural elements without redundancies for exam-
ple long span structures
a) Appropriate loading conditions, indicating the usage at different
parts of the building and identifying any misuse, abuse or devia-
b) Is the loading condition is compatible with the intended purpose
c) Does the misuse, abuse or deviation from intended use given rise
to excessive loading which can adversely affect the building struc-
a) Acceptable Construction methods employed
b) Adequate timelines within which to execute proposed works
c) Timely execution of already embarked on works
a) Materials on site are in accordance with the standards and specifi-
b) Material testing and approvals available on site for example Labo-
ratory concrete cube test for compressive strength after 7 days, 14
days and 28 days and laboratory test for steel, timber or any other
materials for the relevant parameters as per code of practice.
c) Proper storage of materials to minimize deterioration
d) Other Quality control measures in place.
a) Permit for works exceeding 2 m depth below ground.
b) Special Geotechnical conditions handled by engineering design.
b) Observed conditions on site or environs likely to cause unstable soils
c) Measures to contain differential movements and other effects detri-
b) Structural temporal works approval prior to excavation commencement.
c) Adequate temporary support system for the excavation
d) Precautionary measures specified by BC implemented
e) Open excavations maintained in safe condition.
f) Effect of building works on neighboring properties managed evidenced
by presence of a dilapidation report to record the existing condition of
structures prior to your construction works commencing.
5.4.10 SIGNS OF STRCUTURAL DEFECTS AND DETERIORTATION
c) Major structural defects (e.g. structural cracks, decayed timber
f) Recommended remedial actions proposed and implemented
5.4.11 ADDITIONS OR ALTERATIONS TO THE STRUCTURE
Implementation Guide Implementation Guide
OUTCOMES Acceptable √ Unacceptable UNC Improvement IMP Not Not
Condition Condition Recommended Verified Applicable
b) Impact of the additions or alterations to the structure
c) Approvals for the additions or alterations obtained in accordance Build-
a) Adequate temporary support systems for the structural elements
such as excavations, slabs etc provided
b) Stability of the structural supports from effects of agents of weath-
ering, construction activities in the surrounding areas and other
ii) Foundations excavated and level pegs for concreting.
iv) Trenches for drainage work excavated to levels and gradients.
v) Drains laid and joined and ready for testing.
vi) Reinforcing steel fixed in position before concreting.
vii) Concrete shuttering ready for striking.
ix) Roof frame-work completed before covering.
Implementation Guide Implementation Guide
OUTCOMES Acceptable √ Unacceptable UNC Improvement IMP Not Not
Condition Condition Recommended Verified Applicable
a) Appropriate foundation designed and provided
b) The approved foundation design is in agreement with the precise
c) The approved foundation design is not practicable and therefore
there is need to review the design. The amendments made on site
are satisfactory or they require approval of the BC. Where BC ap-
proval it required, it has been obtained prior to continuation of the
d) Adequate foundation to sustain both combine dead and imposed
loads and transmit the loads without causing failure or impairing
e) Foundation is safe from the aggressive environment such as
f) Foundation at a depth equal or greater than 1m to protect the
building against swelling, shrinking and erosion of the sub-soil.
g) Setting out of foundation of the works properly executed
h) Foundations excavated and level pegs for concreting.
i) Foundations concreted, erecting or otherwise, depending on type
5.4.13.2 Structural framework comprising of columns, beams, slabs, wall (Mate-
rials may be structural steel, timber, masonry, reinforced concrete,
a) Structural framework executed in accordance with the approved de-
b) Critical elements within the framework identified and appropriately exe-
cuted in accordance with design
c) Connections between the structural elements appropriately executed
with adequate sizing and proper placement of the connections.
e) Appropriate construction technology most especially for reinforced con-
crete structures allowing concrete to achieve the desired strength prior
f) Identified defects corrected and their impact on the building ascer-
g) Material tests carried and approved out for all key elements
a) Ring beam appropriate sized and constructed in accordance with
d) Quality of materials examined through material testing and ap-
e) Identified defects corrected and their impact on the building
a) Staircase constructed in accordance with approved plans
d) Quality of materials examined through material testing and ap-
e) Identified defects corrected and their impact on the building as-
a) Lift/Shaft Walls constructed in accordance with approved plans
d) Quality of materials examined through material testing and ap-
e) Identified defects corrected and their impact on the building as-
Implementation Guide Implementation Guide
OUTCOMES Acceptable √ Unacceptable UNC Improvement IMP Not Not
Condition Condition Recommended Verified Applicable
a) Retaining walls constructed in accordance with approved plans
d) Adequate temporary support systems provided
e) Quality of materials examined through material testing and ap-
f) Identified defects corrected and their impact on the building as-
a) Roof structure constructed in accordance with approved plans
b) Roof plates are properly bolted to the ring beam and that the raf-
ters are connected to the plate by bolts or acceptable connectors.
c) Appropriate roofing sheets used
d) Quality of materials examined through material testing and ap-
e) Identified defects corrected and their impact on the building as-
f) Appropriate gutters, drop pipes and roof drainage installed
and type used (steel, timber, etc) properly executed
h) Waterproofing valleys and any other surfaces provided
a) Perimeter walls constructed in accordance with approved plans
b) Adequate reinforcement provided where necessary
c) Adequate formwork provided where necessary
d) Quality of materials examined through material testing and ap-
e) Identified defects corrected and their impact on the building as-
a) Internal Roads/Drives-Surface drainage provided in accordance
b) Adequate materials provided and used
c) Quality of materials examined through material testing and ap-
d) Identified defects corrected and their impact on the building as-
5.4.3.10 Foul Water Drainage and Sewerage
a) Foul Water Drainage and Sewerage constructed in accordance
b) Adequate materials provided and used
c) Quality of materials examined through material testing and ap-
d) Identified defects corrected and their impact on the building as-
Implementation Guide Implementation Guide
6.1.1 MECHANICAL INSTALLATIONS IN CLASS A AND B BUILDINGS
OUTCOMES Acceptable √ Unacceptable UNC Improvement IMP Not Not
Condition Condition Recommended Verified Applicable
6.1.1.1 DESIGN DRAWINGS AND DOCUMENTS
6.1.1.2 WATER SUPPLY AND DISTRIBUTION (P4-P23, NBC Standards for Mechan-
6.1.1.2.1 State of joints and connections of pipes.
6.1.1.2.5 Pumps and equipment, alternating power supply, availability of automatic
6.1.1.2.6 Air compressors of the reciprocating type, suitability of installation.
6.1.1.2.8 Hot water system properly installed.
• Allowing for cleaning and disinfection of supply system.
6.1.1.3 FIRST FIX MECHANICAL INSTALLATIONS
6.1.1.3.1 SANITARY FITTINGS, PLUMBING AND DRAINAGE WORKS (P24-P88, NBC
• Cross section area to every 7 m2 of horizontal roofed surface laid to the
6.1.1.3.2 DRAINAGE WORKS (P55-P78, NBC Standards for Mechanical Installations)
6.1.1.3.2.1 Connection to public sewer appropriately one.
• Surface water pipes laid properly.
6.1.1.3.3 SEPTIC TANKS (P79-P84, NBC Standards for Mechanical Installations)
6.1.1.3.3.1 Submission to NWSC the disposal plan from septic tank, dip pipes. Examina-
6.1.1.3.4 CESSPOOLS (P82-P84, NBC Standards for Mechanical Installations)
Implementation Guide Implementation Guide
OUTCOMES Acceptable √ Unacceptable UNC Improvement IMP Not Not
Condition Condition Recommended Verified Applicable
6.1.1.3.4.1 Cesspool not situated within 2m of any spring, well stream of water.
6.1.1.3.4.2 Cesspool emptying not through any building.
6.1.1.3.4.3 Cesspool capacity determined by Building Committee to store soil for one
6.1.1.3.5 TESTING AND DRAINAGE WORKS
6.1.1.3.5.1 Application to NWSC for sewage testing.
6.1.1.3.6 HEATING, VENTILATION AND AIR CONDITIONING (P89-P116, NBC Stan-
6.1.1.3.6.1 Air conditioning and ventilation systems done well.
• Connections and openings are tight to prevent distribution of combus-
6.1.1.4 SECOND FIX MECHANICAL INSTALLATIONS
6.1.1.4.1 DUCT COVERINGS, LININGS, ADHESIVES AND INSULATIONS (P92, NBC
• Adhesives and insulation with flame spread rate below 25.
• Clean out or pump out connection provided.
6.1.1.4.2 FIRE DAMPERS (P94, NBC Standards for Mechanical Installations)
6.1.1.4.3 SMOKE DETECTOR CONTROL (P95, NBC Standards for Mechanical Instal-
6.1.1.4.3.1 Air handling system to incorporate smoke detector control when required.
6.1.1.4.4 EXHAUST DUCTS AND OUTLETS (P96, NBC Standards for Mechanical In-
6.1.1.4.4.2 Check for provision of removal of condensation where this is a problem.
6.1.1.4.5.1 In residential occupancy, air from one suite not to circulate in any other suite.
6.1.1.4.5.2 Exhaust ducts must exhaust through a storage garage.
6.1.1.4.5.3 Public corridor should not be part of supply return or exhaust air system serv-
6.1.1.4.6 FIRE SAFTEY (P117-P122, NBC Standards for Mechanical Installations)
6.1.1.4.6.2 Fire alarm systems designed to avoid false alarm?
• At least two audible sounders installed in building.
Implementation Guide Implementation Guide
OUTCOMES Acceptable √ Unacceptable UNC Improvement IMP Not Not
Condition Condition Recommended Verified Applicable
6.1.1.4.6.4 Firefighting equipment installed visible with symbols as required by Building
6.1.1.4.6.5 Hose reels for firefighting installed in all building of more than 250 m2.
6.1.1.4.6.6 Hydrant bonnet colour coded Green orange and red to show discharge rate.
6.1.1.4.6.8 Hydrant to provide at least 300m hose 16mm internal diameter nozzle.
• Adequate pressure and how to measure.
6.1.1.4.6.10 Portable fire extinguishers in approved positions complying to ISO: 111162:26.
6.1.1.4.6.11 Firefighting lift for building exceeding 18 m.
6.1.1.4.6.12 Testing and certification of Fire Alarm System.
6.1.1.5 LIFTS (P145-P167, NBC Standards for Mechanical Installations)
6.1.1.5.1 Building 15 m or more must have provision for lift.
• Inspection doors have a minimum height of 1.4 m and 6 mm width.
• Emergency doors have a minimum height of 1.8 m and width of 5 mm.
NBC - National Building Code
Implementation Guide Implementation Guide
6.1.2 MECHANICAL INSTALLATIONS IN CLASS C BUILDINGS
OUTCOMES Acceptable √ Unacceptable UNC Improvement IMP Not Not N/A
Condition Condition Recommended Verified Applicable
6.1.2.1 DESIGN DRAWINGS AND DOCUMENTS
6.1.2.2 WATER SUPPLY AND DISTRIBUTION (P4-P23, NBC Standards for Mechan-
• Joints and connections correctly done.
• Appropriate pump-room size and pump properly fitted with power supply.
6.1.2.3 FIRST FIX MECHANICAL INSTALLATIONS
6.1.2.3.1 SANITARY FITTINGS, PLUMBING AND DRAINAGE WORKS (P24-P88, NBC
• Cross section area to every 7 m2 of horizontal roofed surface laid to the right
6.1.2.3.2 DRAINAGE WORKS (P55-P78, NBC Standards for Mechanical Installations)
6.1.2.3.2.1 Connection to public sewer appropriately done:
• Surface water pipes laid properly.
6.1.2.3.3 SEPTIC TANKS (P79-P84, NBC Standards for Mechanical Installations)
6.1.2.3.3.1 Submission to NWSC the disposal plan from septic tank, dip pipes. Examina-
6.1.2.3.4 TESTING AND DRAINAGE WORKS
6.1.2.3.4.1 Application to NWSC for sewage testing.
NBC - National Building Code
Implementation Guide Implementation Guide
6.2.1 ELECTRICAL INSTALLATIONS IN CLASS A, B AND C BUILDINGS
OUTCOMES Acceptable √ Unacceptable UNC Improvement IMP Not Not
Condition Condition Recommended Verified Applicable
6.2.1.1 DESIGN DRAWINGS AND DOCUMENTS
• Approved design drawings, technical specifications, shop drawings, Bills of
Quantities and Design Report on site including:
i) mains and standby power supply,
v) fire detection system and
• Approximate position of existing services indicated on drawings.
6.2.1.2 FIRST FIX ELECTRICAL INSTALLATIONS
6.2.1.2.1 SUB-STATION AND SWITCH ROOM (P4, NBC Standards for Electrical In-
Floor level of sub-station is above the highest flood level of the locality.
6.2.1.2.2 CONDUIT (P16, NBC Standards for Electrical Installations)
• Steel conduit is not less than 20 mm diameter.
• Heavy gauge, solid drawn or welded steel, galvanized or sheradised con-
duit with black enamel used externally.
• High impact, rigid grade plastic conduit used internally.
• Galvanised conduit used in damp areas.
• Solid drawn conduit used in flameproof installations.
• Fixing screws for conduits, switches and box covers are made of appropri-
• Conduit terminated at a main switchboard, distribution board, consumer’s
unit or any metalclad accessory has screwed sockets in good mechanical
and electrical contact with the metal case.
• A draw box is used where there are more than two right angle bends.
• Conduits concealed in the building fabric are arranged as a “looping-in”
system without the use of elbows, tees or bends.
• Conduits are at least 150 mm away from gas piping, steam and hot water
• Expansion couplers used where conduit crosses expansion joints, with an
earth wire running between the nearest conduit box from each side of the
coupling and solidly bonded at each box.
6.2.1.2.3 MOUNTING HEIGHT OF ACCESSORIES (P17, NBC Standards for Electrical
• Switchgear, distribution boards and consumer’s units mounted with lower
edge at 2000 mm from finished floor level.
• Light switches, other than ceiling switches fixed at 1400 mm from finished
floor level to the centre of the switch.
• Isolators and switch fuses, other than those mounted on busbar chambers
or providing local control fixed at 1400 mm from finished floor level to the
underside of the isolator or switch fuse.
• Socket outlets in offices and corridors are fixed 300 mm from finished floor
level to the underside of the socket outlet.
Implementation Guide Implementation Guide
OUTCOMES Acceptable √ Unacceptable UNC Improvement IMP Not Not
Condition Condition Recommended Verified Applicable
6.2.1.2.4 DUCTS FOR UNDERGROUND CABLES (P26 and P27, NBC Standards for
• Ducts provided at points of entry into the buildings.
• Where cables cross under roads or paved areas, earthenware ducts are
Ducts are clear of gas or water pipes, drains and sewers.
6.2.1.3 SECOND FIX ELECTRICAL INSTALLATIONS
6.2.1.3.1 PROTECTIVE DEVICES (P8, NBC Standards for Electrical Installations)
• Every installation and circuit is protected against overcurrent.
• There is a suitably located efficient means for cutting off all voltage.
• Where one of the conductors of the installation is connected to earth,
there is no single pole switch, other than a link for testing purposes, or a
6.2.1.3.2 SWITCHBOARD (P10, NBC Standards for Electrical Installations)
• Switchboards for the control of equipment rated at 240 V/415 V are stand-
ing, of uniform height, flush mounted and totally enclosed with a rigid
• Each switchboard is controlled by a suitable isolating switch or circuit
• The arrangement of the switchboard is such that:
i) all parts which may have to be adjusted or handled are readily ac-
ii) the course of every conductor can be readily traced,
iii) conductors that are not arranged for connection to the same sys-
tem are kept well apart and can readily be distinguished and
iv) all bare conductors are placed and protected to prevent accidental
• The base of the switchboard is effectively sealed.
• Ventilation louvres on the switchboard have a mesh gauze of non-corrosive
• All bolts, nuts, screws, hinges and handles of the switchboard are corrosion
• Cabling access to the switchboard is from the rear.
• The switchboard has hinged lockable doors at the front with termite resis-
tance neoprene gaskets and handles.
• Doors of the switchboards are electrically bonded to the main frame.
• Busbars are made of electro-tinned copper and are of uniform section.
• Busbars are run in separate screened compartments.
• Surge arresters have been installed on the 240V/415 V busbar of the low
• Suitably sized compression type cable glands have been provided for all
• Glands used for armoured cables have provision for sealing the armour
• Lugs have been provided for connection of the cable armouring to earth.
• Lamp fittings are pre-lamped from the front of the switchboard and are
• Exposed terminals on the rear of door mounted components are shrouded.
Implementation Guide Implementation Guide
OUTCOMES Acceptable √ Unacceptable UNC Improvement IMP Not Not
Condition Condition Recommended Verified Applicable
6.2.1.3.3 SWITCHGEAR (P10-P11, NBC Standards for Electrical Installations)
• “ON/OFF” switches and circuit breakers are lockable.
• Switchgear to disconnect live conductors, is such that the neutral conduc-
tor cannot be disconnected or reconnected before the phase conductors.
• Switchgear is of 240 V or 415 V grade, single pole and neutral, double pole
and neutral, triple pole and neutral or quad pole and neutral.
6.2.1.3.4 ISOLATION (P12, NBC Standards for Electrical Installations)
• Switchboard with exposed bare conductors not located in an area set apart
• A clear passageway has been provided for exposed bare conductors.
• Insulating stands or screens have been provided.
6.2.1.3.5 CABLES (P14, NBC Standards for Electrical Installations)
• Cables are PVC insulated and PVC sheathed.
• Cables are of minimum 240 V rating, and not less than 1.5 mm2.
• Cables forming sub-circuits connected to different distribution boards are
not drawn in the same conduit.
• Surface cables are not installed within 300 mm of galvanized iron roofs.
• PVC/XPLE cable are used for outdoors, buried underground and protected
by conduit, where rising above the ground.
• Not more than one phase of an AC installation is brought into a fitting
in the lighting or single phase power circuits, unless indicated otherwise.
• Flexible cords are, visible, fire resistant and not less than 0.75 mm2.
• Cable joints are in a terminal block, of suitable current rating.
• Flexible cables and conduit wiring connections are in a suitable connector.
• Lighting switches are connected in the phase line.
• Ceiling switches are not less than 300 mm from the point they control.
• Sheathed cables are secured by saddles or clips.
• Cables are mounted on timber battens where they cannot be mounted
• Holes in walls to where cables pass have sleeves, with bushed or belled
• There is no moisture ingress through service cables entering the building.
• Cables are colour coded appropriately.
6.2.1.3.6 TRUNKING (P15, NBC Standards for Electrical Installations)
• The trunking trough is clear of obstructions and continuously open, ex-
cept when passing through walls and floors.
• Each group of cables comprising a circuit, installed in trunking, is half
hitched at 600 mm intervals, and the circuit reference is clearly identi-
6.2.1.3.7 EXCAVATION FOR UNDERGROUND CABLES (P32, NBC Standards for Elec-
• Trenches were excavated appropriately to lay underground cables at a
minimum depth of 600 mm below finished ground level.
• Trenchless excavation is used when crossing roads and pathways unless
• Upon completion of laying and testing of cables, trenches were appro-
• Services near cable routes that were uncovered are adequately support-
• Damaged services have been reinstated.
Implementation Guide Implementation Guide
OUTCOMES Acceptable √ Unacceptable UNC Improvement IMP Not Not
Condition Condition Recommended Verified Applicable
• Cables are buried in open ground appropriately prepared, or drawn into
earthenware or other ducts when crossing roadways, paths exceeding
• Cables were appropriately laid and spaced.
• Cables are separated from gas and water mains.
• Cables to termination points in sub-stations or buildings enter via glazed
• Cables with a run of more than 1800 mm inside a building are cleated or
• Jointing of underground cables is minimised as approved.
• Underground cable terminations and joints are appropriately labelled.
• Appropriate warning covers and tape are provided over all underground
cables except XLPE SWA PVC cables.
• Cable ducts sealed appropriately after installation and final tests.
• Cable runs are clearly marked.
6.2.1.3.9.1 FEEDER PILLAR (P33, NBC Standards for Electrical Installations)
• The feeder pillar is a “dwarf type” tailless unit, that is weatherproof, of ro-
bust construction, with hinged lockable doors, mounted on a firm base
and protected from ingress of rainwater, vermin or termites or other
• The fuse ways are clearly identified.
6.2.1.3.9.2 EARTHING (P34, NBC Standards for Electrical Installations)
• Appropriate earthing is provided adjacent to supply terminals.
• The earth continuity of conduit and trunking installations is reliable and
• All parts not solidly connected to earthing are connected thereto by a
solid copper conductor and bonding clamps.
• All services entering the installation at earth potential are efficiently
bonded to the main earth points.
• The resistance of the earth continuity system does not exceed 8 ohms.
• All flexible metallic tubing has an insulated earth conductor.
• The size of the earth conductor is not less than 4 mm2.
6.2.1.3.9.3 LIGHTNING PROTECTION (P35, NBC Standards for Electrical Installations)
• Lightning protection system provided consisting of 20 x 3 mm copper
or aluminium tape sections, with similar clips, test clamps and copper
• The tape from the earth test position to the earth electrode is copper
• Aluminium and copper junctions are suitably jointed.
• The earth resistance does not exceed 10 ohms.
6.2.1.4 THIRD FIX ELECTRICAL INSTALLATIONS
6.2.1.4.1 DISTRIBUTION BOARDS AND CONSUMERS UNITS (P5, NBC Standards for
Distribution Boards, Consumer’s Units, circuit breakers, fuses and switches
RCDs are installed in circuits for security lighting.
6.2.1.4.3 SWITCHES (P19, NBC Standards for Electrical Installations)
• Lighting switches are 5 A or 15 A, of insulated pattern, single pole, quick
make and slow break for AC circuits, and quick make and quick break for
• Ceiling switches are suitably mounted with a pull cords.
Implementation Guide Implementation Guide
OUTCOMES Acceptable √ Unacceptable UNC Improvement IMP Not Not
Condition Condition Recommended Verified Applicable
6.2.1.4.4 SOCKET OUTLETS (P19, NBC Standards for Electrical Installations)
• Single phase socket outlets are 3 pin rectangular, shuttered, unless oth-
erwise approved, with the third pin effectively earthed.
• Three phase socket outlets are of 4 pin scraping earth pattern.
• Three phase with neutral outlets are of 5 pin scraping earth pattern.
• Socket outlets are switched type unless otherwise approved.
• RCD protected socket outlets are installed in wet areas.
• The water heater is the only equipment connected to the circuit, for wa-
ter heaters with a capacity of 15 litres or more.
• The flexible cord of the water heater is heat resistant.
• The water heater has a 20 A Double Pole switch and an overheat protec-
6.2.1.5 TESTING OF ELECTRICTAL INSTALLATIONS (P37, NBC Standards for Elec-
The tests below were carried out on the complete installation and on each
ii) Continuity of circuit protective conductors
iii) Continuity of ring final circuit conductors
vii) Earth fault loop impedance
x) Operation of residual current operated devices
6.2.1.6.1 PHOTOVOLTAIC PANELS (P39-P41, NBC Standards for Electrical Installa-
• The photovoltaic panels have a quality mark.
• The photovoltaic panels are positioned to avoid shading.
• Where shading is unavoidable, it has been compensated for by reducing
the daily energy output in the system design.
• The photovoltaic panel is inclined at an angle of between 10 and 20 de-
grees to the horizontal plane, facing due north or south, for fixed panels.
6.2.1.6.2 LIGHTNING PROTECTION FOR PHOTOVOLTAIC PANELS (P42, NBC Stan-
• The photovoltaic panels are installed at a point lower than the highest
• The support frame of the PV panels has a short lightning rod which is the
6.2.1.6.3 PHOTOVOLTAIC PANELS SUPPORT STRUCTURE (P43, NBC Standards for
• The photovoltaic panels support structure is durable and weather and cor-
• The photovoltaic panels structure is securely fixed.
Implementation Guide Implementation Guide
OUTCOMES Acceptable √ Unacceptable UNC Improvement IMP Not Not
Condition Condition Recommended Verified Applicable
6.2.1.6.4 ROOF MOUNTING OF PV PANELS (P44, NBC Standards for Electrical In-
• The mounting of PV panels on roofs is done to prevent leakages and corro-
• Where the solar PV panels form part of the roof, the roof is weathered prop-
erly and there is suitable ventilation beneath the solar PV panels.
6.2.1.6.5 GROUND MOUNTING OF PV PANELS (P45, NBC Standards for Electrical
• Ground mounted PV panels are well supported, fenced and not mount-
ed closer than 800 mm from the ground.
6.2.1.6.6 BATTERIES (P46-P47, NBC Standards for Electrical Installations)
• Batteries are of deep discharge type and have a long-life cycle.
• Each battery is marked with the date of manufacture and installation.
• Batteries are installed in enclosed equipment.
• At least 20 mm free space has been left between the batteries and the
wall and top of the batteries enclosure.
• The batteries enclosure is ventilated, securely fixed and made of durable
materials, and if made of wood, it is well preserved against insects, ter-
6.2.1.6.7 CONTROLLER (P48, NBC Standards for Electrical Installations)
• The rated capacity of the controller can handle the maximum short cir-
cuit current from the PV array, and the maximum load.
• The controller and circuit breakers or fuses bear the manufacturer’s PV
• The controller has a warning and remote alarm (if installed in a room that
• The inverter has adequate ventilation.
• The inverter has clearly labelled DC rated isolation on the DC side.
• The inverter has a lockable AC isolator on the AC side.
• Where the inverter is sited away from the consumer’s unit, a lockable AC
isolator is installed next to the consumer’s unit.
• The inverter has simple separation between the AC and DC side, if not
the solar PV array frame is bonded.
6.2.1.6.9 CIRCUITS OF SOLAR PV SYSTEMS (P48, NBC Standards for Electrical In-
• There is a warning of low battery for non-essential circuits.
• The system is protected against damage due to accidental short-circuits.
• The peak demand of each circuit does not exceed 80% of the rated ca-
pacity of the fuse or circuit breaker.
• Each fuse or circuit-breaker is clearly marked.
• All equipment is rated at a minimum of 1.15 times the maximum voltage,
and 1.25 times the maximum current produced in the system.
6.2.1.6.10 CONDUIT (P59, NBC Standards for Electrical Installations)
• Surface mounted conduit with single wire conductors is installed appro-
• PVC conduit is used under floors.
• Steel conduit is used where heavy or unpredictable loads may occur.
• Under floor conduit is not less than 20 mm diameter.
6.2.1.6.11 CONDUCTORS (P54, P60, NBC Standards for Electrical Installations)
• The correct type of cables are used for the DC and AC installation and
they are correctly labelled and colour coded.
• The rated current carrying capacity at 35°C is not exceeded.
• Minimum cross section area of the conductors is 2.5 mm2.
• The cables from the solar PV panels are tied to the array frame, for a roof
• The cables are installed appropriately.
Implementation Guide Implementation Guide
OUTCOMES Acceptable √ Unacceptable UNC Improvement IMP Not Not
Condition Condition Recommended Verified Applicable
6.2.1.6.12 VOLTAGE DROP (P60, NBC Standards for Electrical Installations)
• The voltage across any system component is not less than 5% of the bat-
tery terminal voltage, and not less than 10.5 V.
• The voltage drop between the PV panels and batteries does not exceed
6.2.1.6.13 CABLE CONNECTIONS (P62, NBC Standards for Electrical Installations)
• Cables are connected using junction boxes, block connectors or solder-
ing joints with insulating sleeves.
• The rated capacity through the cable joints is not less than that of the
circuit to which they are a part of.
6.2.1.6.14 UNDERGROUND CABLES AND CONDUITS (P63, NBC Standards for Electri-
• Underground cables are at least 600 mm below the surface and are
• Underground cables are used across all areas with vehicular traffic
• The underground cables and conduits can withstand vertical loads.
• Suspended cables are mounted so that the lowest point is at least 2700
• Cables are suitably held in position.
• Ultra violet resistant cables are used outdoors.
• Attachments of cables or conduit are made with appropriate fasteners.
• Cable holes through the roof are drilled at the top of corrugations, sealed
and waterproofed with ultra violet-resistant silicon sealant or its equiv-
• Cables passed through roofs are contained in roof-entry boxes.
• Cables fixed through or passing through flammable are shielded in
• Fittings are fastened to suitable supports.
6.2.1.6.15 LIGHTS (P65, NBC Standards for Electrical Installations)
• A metal lamp fitting or shield is installed on lamps next to thatched or
• Lamps with enclosures or detractors can be opened.
• RCDs are installed in circuits for security lighting.
6.2.1.6.16 SOCKETS (P66, NBC Standards for Electrical Installations)
• It is not possible to reverse the polarity of the socket outlets.
• 240 VAC mains sockets are used where a 240 V outlet is provided from
• Circuit breakers and earthing are provided.
• Installations that have DC sockets are wired so that the large diameter
pin in the plug is always positive.
• All positive connections are made with red insulated wire and negative
connections are made with black insulated wire.
• RCD protected socket outlets are installed in wet areas.
6.2.1.6.17 SWITCHES (P67, NBC Standards for Electrical Installations)
• Standard switches for 240 VAC are not used as an alternative to special
switches for 12 VDC, 24 VDC and 48 VDC, except as approved.
• All switches are rated at twice their expected load current.
• All switches include a clear visual indication of their state.
6.2.1.6.18 LABELLING OF COMPONENTS OF SOLAR PV SYSTEMS (P54, NBC Stan-
All solar PV equipment is suitably and legibly labelled.
The warnings below are provided:
• dual supply, indicating the isolation point for the solar PV system and the
Implementation Guide Implementation Guide
OUTCOMES Acceptable √ Unacceptable UNC Improvement IMP Not Not
Condition Condition Recommended Verified Applicable
6.2.1.6.20 TESTING OF SOLAR PV SYSTEM (P55, NBC Standards for Electrical Instal-
The tests below have been carried out on the DC side of the solar PV instal-
6.2.1.6.21 WARRANTIES AND COMPONENTS OF SOLAR PV SYSTEM (P56, NBC Stan-
6.2.1.7 FIRE DETECTION AND ALARM SYSTEM
• An automatic fire detection and alarm system is installed in:
ii) covered shopping complexes and large or complex places of assembly,
iv) in compensation for a reduction in standards of certain other fire pro-
v) in lieu of vision between an inner room and its associated access room
vi) as a means of automatically operating other fire protection measures.
• The fire detection and alarm system includes manual call points and
• There is a fire alarm control and indicating panel.
• There is a zone plan next to the fire alarm control and indicating panel.
• The fire detection and alarm system has been tested.
Implementation Guide Implementation Guide
OUTCOMES Acceptable √ Unacceptable UNC Improvement IMP Not Not
Condition Condition Recommended Verified Applicable
Emergency lighting is installed in the following areas:
vii) stairways so that each flight receives adequate light,
ix) windowless toilets and toilet accommodation exceeding 8 m2,
xii) at equipment that would need to be shut down in an emergency,
xiv) in rooms of area greater than 60 m2.
As-built drawings are provided for all electrical installations.
NBC - National Building Code
Implementation Guide Implementation Guide
6.3 ICT INSTALLATIONS IN CLASS A AND B BUILDINGS
OUTCOMES Acceptable √ Unacceptable UNC Improvement IMP Not Not
Condition Condition Recommended Verified Applicable
There are approved design drawings on site of the following:
a) Private Automatic Exchange System (PABX),
b) Local area data network (structured cabling),
c) Closed Circuit Television (CCTV) and
• Buildings containing essential ICT rooms have a local duplicated supply of
• Several small ICT rooms use a shared secondary electricity distribution sys-
• Distribution boards for mains power supply, standby power supply and un-
interruptible power supply are located in separate cabinets.
• Distribution Boards supplying essential ICT rooms have each circuit break-
er installed in a separate case, isolated from the busbar. The cable connec-
tions for each circuit breaker are isolated from each other.
• Distribution Boards in ICT rooms have plug-in circuit breakers.
• Distribution Boards in ICT rooms have 10% spare circuits and 30% free
• Overvoltage protection is installed in the Distribution Boards supplying
• ICT rooms have emergency shut-down switches for mains power supply
and UPS. The switches are protected to prevent unintentional disconnec-
• The distance between electricity distribution boards and active or passive
• All electrical installations in ICT rooms have colour coded labels.
• All circuits are labelled with a circuit number.
• Major buildings with essential ICT rooms have diesel generators providing
standby power with an output of at least 1½ to 2 times the calculated load.
• If the generator is to supply other loads, this is allowed for.
• The generator has an outdoor diesel tank with at least 72 hours capacity.
• A centralised online UPS is installed to supply ICT rooms.
• The UPS is electrically isolated during normal inverter operation and in
• For UPS installations of greater than 50 kVA, the distribution boards for the
mains power supply, standby power supply and UPS power are located in
another room away from the server room, UPS room or battery room, but
• The UPS has manual bypass switching.
• The UPS has static bypass switching.
6.3.5 UPS AND BATTERY ROOM
• UPS installations of greater than 50 kVA and with long discharge time are
located in a dedicated UPS and battery room.
• The UPS and battery room has a cooling system.
• The UPS and battery room with a high load level of up to 1500 kg/m2 is
located in the basement of the building.
• Power Distribution Units are installed in equipment racks connected to
Implementation Guide Implementation Guide
OUTCOMES Acceptable √ Unacceptable UNC Improvement IMP Not Not
Condition Condition Recommended Verified Applicable
• ICT rooms and conduit paths for IT cables are located at a safe distance
from installations which emit electric fields.
• All cable penetrations for EMC cables are limited to a small area of the wall.
• Separate conduit paths or racks are installed for electric power supply, ge-
neric cabling and patch cords in server rooms, Equipment Rooms (ERs)
• In larger server rooms, telephony/data cables are laid on racks beneath the
ceiling and power cables are laid on racks beneath a raised floor.
• Cable installations beneath raised floors do not block circulation of cooling
• The height of the raised floor is a minimum of 400 mm.
• The sub-floor of the raised floor was lowered so that the raised floor is at the
same height as the floors in adjacent rooms.
• The raised floor can withstand the weight of the ICT equipment.
• If a raised floor could not be installed because of limited ceiling height,
cooling racks and chambers have been installed.
• All operating computer equipment cables, distribution networks cables
and backbone cables are installed on racks accessed from the front.
• The smallest clearance at all surfaces on racks and cabinets where access
• Telephone cables are high conductivity copper conductors of 3 kg or 9 kg
per mile weight and are polythene insulated PVC sheathed overall.
• Telecommunication cables have surge protection installed and are
• Outdoor cables are laid in conduit. If more than one cable is installed in a
• Manholes are provided for accessing the cables. Distances between man-
• The bottom of the trench in which the conduit is laid is free from stones
• The foundation of the trench in which the conduit is laid is at least 100 mm
deep and is composed of appropriate fill material.
• The area where the conduit lies is appropriately backfilled.
• Cable entry is through rooms that are a safe distance from power cables
or transformers, have easy access to the pathway to the ICT room and have
• All cabling that penetrates fire barriers is fireproofed.
• Trunking or conduit containing signal cables and power cables cross each
• There is a free space of 1200 mm between all rack surfaces to which access
• ICT rooms containing active equipment are not used as store rooms.
• Store rooms containing inflammable materials are not located adjacent
• Water pipes running through ICT rooms are for supply of cooling installa-
• Floor drains in ICT rooms are fitted with non-return valves.
• Humidity sensors are installed in floors close to cooling units and near wa-
ter pipes running through the ICT room and drains in ICT rooms.
• Water pipes running through ICT rooms and pipes serving cooling units in
ICT rooms are insulated. The pipes are at the same earth potential as the
• ICT rooms are air tight.
• An early detection fire detection system is installed in ICT rooms.
• Fire extinguisher systems are installed in ICT rooms.
6.3.9 CEILING HEIGHT IN ICT ROOMS
• The minimum ceiling height in ICT rooms is 2600 mm from the floor to the
underside of cable racks and light fittings.
• There is at least 400 mm clearance from the tops of cable racks for patch
cables, to the underside of any ceiling mounted installation in ICT rooms.
• Lights are installed to illuminate the outsides, insides and between racks.
• The light intensity on the horizontal plane is 500 – 800 lux, and on the ver-
Implementation Guide Implementation Guide
OUTCOMES Acceptable √ Unacceptable UNC Improvement IMP Not Not
Condition Condition Recommended Verified Applicable
• Floor coverings in ICT rooms are earthed. The resistance between any point
in the floor covering and earth is between 1 and 10 MΩ.
cable racks and floors of ICT rooms have the same earth potential.
• All ICT rooms have their own earth rail for connecting the conductive struc-
• There is a dedicated mesh earth bonding network in essential ICT rooms.
• In small ICT rooms where no mesh earth bonding network is installed, an
• Patch panels are earthed appropriately.
• Access Control System has 24 hour battery backup.
• Access Control system connected to UPS.
• CCTV has 24 hour battery backup.
NBC - National Building Code
Implementation Guide Implementation Guide
Class A Building: Buildings with high social impact or located in sensitive ecosystem.
4) Shopping Malls and Arcades
5) Multi-storeyed Buildings – more than 12 m high (Offices, Accommodation and
1) Multi-storeyed Buildings – less than 12 m high (Offices, Accommodation and Mixed
2) Single-storeyed Buildings (Offices, Accommodation and Mixed Use)
2) Minor Buildings – less than 30 m2 (Stalls, etc.)
Implementation Guide Implementation Guide
SITTIG ROOM MASTER BEDROOM
to The Uganda Gazette No. 5, Volume CXIII, dated 17th January, 2020
Part II—remuneratIon of members of the board
3. Remuneration of members of the Board
6. Design and supervision by professionals
11. Electrical engineering installation plans
12. Mechanical engineering installations plans
16. Use of unconventional materials or methods
Building Control Officer and Assistant Building
18. Building Control Officer and Assistant Building Control Officer
19. Application for building permit for minor building works
20. Application for a building permit for temporary building operations
21. Application for building permit for residential or commercial
22. Application for building permit for complex structures or public
23. Receipt of applications for building permits
24. Notification of approval, deferral and rejection of application
26. Preliminary building permit enquiries
Building Site Operation and Management
27. Notice of commencement and completion of certain stages of work
32. Excavations and measures for stability of site
34. Application for occupation permit
35. Revocation of building occupation permit
39. Deviation from approved plan
41. Compliance audits by the Board
42. General offences and penalties
(Under section 52 of the Building Control Act, 2013,
In exerCIse of the powers conferred on the Minister responsible
for building works by section 52 of the Building Control Act, 2013 and
on advice of the National Building Review Board, these Regulations
are made this 11th day of November, 2019.
These Regulations may be cited as the Building Control Regulations,
In these Regulations, unless the context otherwise requires—
“Act” means the Building Control Act, 2013;
“Architect” means a person who is registered by the Architects
Registration Board under the Architects Registration Act
“artificial ventilation system’’ means a system in which air is caused
to circulate through a room by means of mechanical apparatus
which forces air into or extracts air from such room;
“basement” means any storey of a building, which is under the
first storey and any portion, which is below the level of the
adjoining pavement or the surrounding ground;
“block” means a walling unit made from stone or wet clay,
hardened by heat, either sun baked or fire baked, which
exceeds the size of a brick in overall dimensions;
“brick” means common or standard basic building unit that
supports vertical loads made from stone or wet clay,
hardened by heat, either sun baked or fire baked;
“Building control officer” means a Building Control Officer
appointed under section 32 of the Act;
“Building Committee” means a Building Committee established
“cesspool “means a covered watertight tank used for receiving
and storing sewage from premises which cannot be connected
to a public sewer and where ground conditions prevent the
use of an on site treatment works including a septic tank;
“chimney” means a part of a building, which forms part of a flue
“Code” means National Building Code, 2019 issued under
“column” means a vertical member of a structure carrying axial
loads and moments whose width is not more than four
“concrete” means a material formed from a mixture of cement,
fine and coarse aggregates and water;
“currency point” has a value assigned to it in Schedule 1;
“division” means a portion of a building separated from the
remainder of the building by one or more separating
“drain” means a conduit channel used for the drainage of a
building or premises within the same curtilage;
closet, waste pipe or any other item connected with
“dwelling unit” means a unit containing one or more habitable
rooms and provided with adequate sanitary and cooking
facilities and is lawfully used or constructed, adapted or
designed to be used as a residence for one family;
“emergency route” means the entire path of travel from the
farthest point in any room in a building to the nearest
“Engineer” means a person who is registered by the Engineers
Registration Board under the Engineers Registration Act
“escape door” means a door in an escape route, which leads
directly to a street or to any approved open space leading
“escape route” means the entire path of travel from the farthest
point in any room in a building to the nearest escape door
and may include an emergency route;
“exit door” means any door that is a component of an escape
route from any room in a building;
“external wall” means an outer wall of a building, but does not
include a party wall or separating wall;
“fire resistance” means the shortest period a building element
or component shall comply with the requirements for
stability, integrity and insulation when tested to the fire
“flight” means a part of a stairway, which consists of consecutive
“floor area” means the net area measured on a plan enclosed
within the internal surfaces of external walls without
“flue” means a passage for conveying the discharge of a heat
generating appliance to the external air;
“flue pipe” means a pipe forming flue but does not include a pipe
“foundation” means member of the structure that distributes
loads directly to the ground or that part of a building in
direct contact with and intended to transmit loads to the
“garage” means an enclosed area, which is used or intended to
be used for the parking, storing, servicing or repairing of
“habitable room” means a room constructed or adapted to be
used as a living or sleeping room or as a place for habitual
“hoarding” means a temporary fence made of light approved
material erected around a building site;
“incremental house” means any dwelling house that, for reasons
manner that in its intermediate stages the house can
be occupied by its owner for a specified period of time
“industrial effluent” means any liquid whether or not containing
matter in solution or suspension which is given off
in the course of or as a result of any industrial, trade,
manufacturing, mining or chemical process or any
laboratory, research or agriculture activity and includes
any liquid other than soil water or storm water;
“landing” means a platform between two consecutive flights of
“latrine” means place or receptacle for the decomposition of the
human excrement and includes a pit privy, urinal, chemical
“load” means any force to which a building is or may be subjected
and includes dead, imposed, wind, seismic and other loads
and forces caused by dimensional changes of materials;
“manhole” means a chamber of a depth greater than 750mm and
of such dimensions that allow entry of a person into such
chamber for the purpose of inspection of a drain, or sewer;
“member” means a structural component such as a beam, joist,
“minor building works” has a meaning assigned to it under
“nosing” means the front edge of a tread of a stairway and
includes the front edge of the top surface of any landing,
which is situated at the top of a flight;
“occupancy” means the particular use or the type of use to
which a building or portion of a building is normally put
(a) a wall forming part of a building and used or
constructed to be used for the separation of adjoining
buildings belonging to different owners, constructed
(b) a wall forming part of a building and standing on
“Physical Planning Committee” means a Physical Planning
Committee established under the Physical Planning Act,
“plot” means a parcel of land demarcated by definite boundaries
and includes all land within the curtilage of the building,
out-buildings, yards, courts, open spaces and gardens-
attached or intended to be occupied, other than the land
used, allotted or set apart for any street, lane, passage or
“professional body” includes the Engineers Registration
Board, the Surveyors Registration Board and Architects
“public building” means a building to which the public have
a right of access during all reasonable times for reasons
which the building is used in accordance with its prescribed
“public place” means any square, park, recreation ground or
(b) the public has the right to use; or
(c) is designated and shown as such on any development
“public sewer” means any sewer vested in the control of a public
“reinforced concrete” means concrete containing the specified
“repairs” means operations on a building to restore it to an
identical condition as to appearance, structure and
occupancy which existed before the operations became
necessary whether caused by fair wear and tear or by
accident; except that repairs shall not include the complete
“retaining wall” means a wall intended to resist the lateral
“return form” means a form submitted with building plans as
required under the Architects Registration Act;
“scaffolding” means a temporary frame constructed to provide
means of access to high level working areas as well as
providing a safe platform from which to work;
“separating element” means a wall or floor which has a specific
fire resistance used between division occupancies or
“septic tank” means a watertight tank designed to receive sewage
and to retain it for such a period as to secure adequate
“sewage” means waste water, soil water, industrial effluent and
other liquid waste flowing in separate or combined sewer
but does not include storm water;
“sewer” means a pipe, conduit or drain, which is used for the
“stability” means resistance of a structure or part of a structure
“stairway” means any part of a building, which provides
ascending or descending route of travel formed by a single
flight or by a combination of two or more flights and one
“storey” means part of a building which is situated between the
floor level next below it and the floor of the level above it
or, if there is no floor above it, the ceiling;
“storm water drain” means a pipe, conduit or surface channel,
which is used solely to convey storm water;
“storm water” means water resulting from natural precipitation
and includes rainwater, surface water, sub-soil water or
“street” means any highway, road, service lane or any land
reserved for a highway, road or service lane and includes
whether a thoroughfare intended for use by the public or
“structural” means relating to or forming part of any structural
“structural system” means the system of constructional elements
and components of a building, which is provided to resist
the loads acting upon it and to transfer the loads to the
ground upon which the building is founded;
“surveyor” means a surveyor registered under the Surveyor’s
(a) an incremental house in any intermediate stage of
(b) a building intended to be used for experimental,
(c) any stall or other similar building to be erected as
“tread” means the upper surface of a step;
“wall” means a vertical load-bearing or non-load-bearing
member of a structure whose length exceeds four times its
“water closet” means latrine accommodation used with water
borne system of excreta disposal; and
“width” means the distance between opposite plot
boundaries, measured at right angles to the direction of
Part II—remuneratIon of members of the board
3. Remuneration of members of the Board
The Chairperson and members of the Board shall be paid remuneration
or allowances as the Minister may specify in their instruments of
appointment, in consultation with the Minister responsible for finance
and the Minister responsible for public service.
4. Remuneration of Building Committee members
Members of the Building Committee shall be paid remuneration or
allowances as the Minister may determine.
(1) The Building Committee shall, as a condition in the building
permit, require the owner of a building other than a minor building
(a) employ an architect for purposes of architectural design;
(b) employ an engineer for the purposes of an engineering
(c) employ a surveyor for the purposes of surveying services
(d) retain the services of the architect and the engineer for the
purpose of supervising the construction of the building;
(e) retain a health and safety expert on site throughout the
(f) retain the services of any other professional necessary to a
(2) The architectural and engineering drawings, documents and
site reports shall be signed by the architect or engineer engaged by the
(3) On completion of the building operations, the architect or the
engineer as the case may be, shall submit to the Building Committee a
certificate confirming that the work has been carried out in accordance
with the approved plans, the Act, these Regulations and the Code.
(4) For the purposes of these Regulations, the Building Committee
shall keep a register of qualified architects, structural engineers and
surveyors as gazetted from time to time by their respective professional
6. Design and supervision by professionals
(1) Where a person engages an architect or engineer to design
or supervise a building or a part of a building, the building operations
shall be deemed to satisfy the requirements of these Regulations;
provided the person retains the services of the architect or engineer
(2) The architect and engineer shall certify to the Building
Committee, the satisfactory completion of the building before an
(3) Where the owner of a building terminates the services of
the architect or engineer at any time before the occupation permit is
issued, the owner shall immediately notify the Building Committee,
and the Building Committee may—
(a) stop any further building operations until another architect
(b) assign an architect or engineer from an annually gazetted
list of architects and engineers, who shall be retained at the
expense of the owner for purposes of ensuring compliance
with the Act, these Regulations and the Code, until an
(4) Where an architect or engineer terminates his or her services
from the owner under this regulation, the architect or engineer shall
immediately notify the Building Committee.
(1) Where an architect, engineer or surveyor fails to perform his
or her duty as required by law under the employment of the owner,
the owner may report the architect, engineer or surveyor to their
respective professional body for disciplinary action and notify the
relevant Building Committee and the Board for appropriate action.
(2) Where an architect, engineer or surveyor fails to comply
with the Act, these Regulations or the Code, the Building Committee
(a) issue a warning to the engineer, surveyor or architect
(b) report the architect, engineer or surveyor to their respective
professional body for appropriate action;
(c) request a report to be submitted by the professional body
to the Building Committee on any action taken under
(d) recommend to the Director of Public Prosecution for
prosecution under section 40(3) or section 45 of the Act,
Buildings shall be classified according to form, size, complexity, social
and environmental impact under Category A, B or C as prescribed in
(1) Architectural plans shall consist of the following, where
applicable, and to the satisfaction of the Building Committee—
(h) drainage plans; storm, foul and waste water; and
(i) boundary wall plan and details.
(2) The architectural drawings and diagrams shall be drawn to
suitable scales but not smaller than any of the following scales—
(b) layout drawings, including demolition drawings, if any-
(1) Civil or structural engineering plans, drawings and diagrams
shall contain the following, where applicable—
(2) Civil or structural engineering plans, drawings and diagrams
referred to in subregulation (1) shall be drawn to suitable scales but
11. Electrical engineering installation plans
(1) Electrical engineering installation plans, drawings and
diagrams shall contain the following, where applicable—
(a) mains and standby power supply;
(f) private automatic branch exchange system (PABX);
(g) local area data network (structured cabling); and
(2) The electrical engineering plans, drawings and diagrams
referred to in subregulation (1) shall be drawn to suitable scales but
12. Mechanical engineering installations plans
(1) Mechanical engineering installation plans, drawings and
diagrams shall contain the following, where applicable—
(2) The mechanical engineering plans, drawings and diagrams
referred to in subregulation (1) shall be drawn to suitable scales but
not smaller than any of the following scales—
(1) The building plans referred to under regulation 9, 10, 11
and 12 shall indicate sections, elevations, calculations and drawings,
specifications of materials and such other particulars as the Building
(2) The Building Committee may require the applicant to submit
the building plans as white bond paper, soft copy, blue print or any
(3) Where an applicant submits the building plans in hard copy
format, he or she shall submit the documents in quadruplet to the
(4) All building plans, sections and elevations required by the
Building Committee shall be prepared by an architect or engineer and
(a) be clearly and accurately delineated in ink or other suitable
permanent manner, on a suitable and durable material to
the scales prescribed in regulations 9, 10, 11 and 12;
(b) describe the class or nature of the building and show
clearly the purpose for which every room or part of the
(c) indicate the stages and method by which it is intended
to construct the building, if it is not to be built in one
(d) indicate the materials of which the building will be
constructed; and show clearly and accurately the position,
form and dimensions of the foundations, walls, floors,
rooms and the other parts of the buildings;
(e) include a plan of every floor and complete sections of
the foundations and of every storey, floor and roof of the
(f) differentiate clearly between new work and existing work,
if the building permit applied for is for work on an existing
(g) any other particulars as the Building Committee may
(5) The building plans shall be signed by the architect or engineer
who prepared the plans, drawing or other relevant document.
(6) In all cases the scales used shall be stated on the plans,
drawings or diagrams and the letters and symbols adopted shall not be
(7) The north point shall be shown at the top right hand corner of
the site plan or location plans.
(1) A person shall not carryout excavation works exceeding two
meters below the original ground level without a permit issued by the
(2) An excavation exceeding 2 meters below the original ground
level or in situations where special geotechnical considerations exist,
(3) An excavation for a foundation shall be taken down to a
firm natural ground and the bottom made horizontal or design the
foundation to suit the existing site conditions.
(4) Where an excavation for a foundation is in solid rock, the
bottom of the excavation shall be taken into the rock to a depth not
less than 300mm or the depth equal to the thickness of the foundation
(5) Where excavation into solid rock is not practicable under
subregulation (4), the Building Committee may evaluate the technical
(1) The Building Committee shall by notice in the Gazette,
prescribe the types of building and locations that require proposals for
landscaping of the site as part of the building operations.
(2) The landscaping proposal referred to under subregulation (1)
(a) to enhance the aesthetics of the site and the adjacent area;
(b) to provide a screen against environmental hazards; or
(c) to contain hazardous substances or activities within the
(3) The proposal for landscaping shall include indigenous flora
(4) Parking for motor vehicles shall be provided within the
boundary of the site in accordance with the Code.
16. Use of unconventional materials or methods
(1) A person intending to use any building methods or materials
for building, for which no provision has been made under the Code,
shall submit an application in writing to the Building Committee
giving details of the methods and materials intended to be used.
(2) The Building Committee may, with the consent and at the
cost of the applicant, appoint a consultant to report on whether the
standard of durability and stability of the building to be constructed
from the materials or by methods not provided for in the Code are
equal to the standard imposed by the Code.
(1) Where the Building Committee has reason to believe that
there are unstable subsoils or unstable slopes on a building site, it shall
(2) Where unstable soil or an unstable slope is evident within
the boundaries of the site, the applicant shall submit to the Building
Committee particulars of the measure considered necessary to make
provision for any differential movements or other effects which may be
detrimental to the building irrespective of whether or not the Building
Committee informed the applicant about the unstable soils or slopes.
Building Control Officer and Assistant Building
18. Building Control Officer and Assistant Building Control
(1) Every District Service Commission shall in accordance
with section 32 of the Act, appoint a Building Control Officer, Urban
Building Control Officer and such other Assistant Building Control
Officers as are necessary to enable the Building Committee to carry
out its functions under the Act.
(2) A Building Control Officer or Urban Building Control Officer
(a) has at least a bachelors degree in any of the following
(b) has a minimum of five years continuous employment in
(c) is registered with the relevant professional body.
(3) An Assistant Building Control Officer shall be a person with
(a) at least an ordinary diploma or its equivalent and he or she
shall belong to a relevant professional association in any
(b) a minimum of three years continuous employment in the
(4) The Building Control Officer appointed under this regulation
shall submit reports on the performance of his or her functions under
the Act to the relevant Building Committee at least once every quarter.
19. Application for building permit for minor building works
(1) A person who intends to erect a minor building shall apply to
the Building Control Officer for a building permit in accordance with
(2) The application referred to in subregulation (1) shall be in
Form 1 set out in Schedule 3 and shall be accompanied by—
(a) a letter from the chairperson of the village council of the
(b) proof of ownership of land in accordance with the Land
Act, including the certificate of title, power of attorney
from the registered proprietor or other satisfactory proof
(c) development permission from the Physical Planning
(e) proof of payment of application fees prescribed in
(f) any other document as may be required by the Building
(3) Where the Building Control Officer deems any application
to be of such character or magnitude as to have a substantial impact on
the neighbourhood or community, he or she shall direct the applicant to
place a notice in the Gazette or newspaper of wide circulation inviting
representations from the public in writing to the Building Control
(4) The Building Control Officer shall make copies of the
representations from the public available to the applicant within
fourteen days and the applicant shall have fourteen days to make a
(5) The Building Control Officer shall, within twenty one days
from the date of receipt of the application in subregulation (1), give his
(6) A person aggrieved by the decision of the Building Control
Officer under this regulation may appeal to the Building Committee
within fourteen days from the date of receipt of the decision.
20. Application for a building permit for temporary building
(1) A person who wishes to erect a temporary building shall
apply to the Building Committee for a building permit.
(2) The application referred to in subregulation (1) shall be in
Form 2 set out in Schedule 3 and shall be accompanied by—
(b) detailed architectural drawings to enable the Building
Committee to determine the size, form, materials of
construction and use of the proposed temporary building;
(c) where it is intended that the public shall have access to
the building, structural details necessary for the Building
Committee to determine the structural safety of the
(d) proof of payment of application fee prescribed in Schedule
(e) any other document as may be required by the Building
(3) Notwithstanding subregulation (2), where a stall is to be
erected inside an exhibition hall, the owner of the hall shall not be
required to submit to the Building Committee any details of the stall
but shall submit to the Building Committee a layout plan of all the
stalls within the hall showing the location of each individual stall,
escape doors and firefighting equipment.
(4) Where the Building Committee is satisfied with an application
made under subregulation (1), it may within thirty days from the date
of receipt of the application, grant the application subject to conditions
as may be specified in the building permit.
(5) A person granted a building permit under subregulation
(4) shall commence building operations within twelve months in
accordance with section 38(1) of the Act.
(6) The period referred to in subregulation (5) may be extended
by the Building Committee upon request of the owner of the temporary
building in accordance with section 38 (2) of the Act.
(7) Where it is intended that the public shall have access to
the building, the request referred to under subregulation (6) shall be
accompanied by a certificate signed by an engineer, indicating that
the condition of the structural system is satisfactory for the period of
21. Application for building permit for residential or commercial
(1) A person intending to carry out a building operation of
residential or commercial building shall submit an application for a
building permit to the Building Committee in accordance with section
35 of the Act and these Regulations.
(2) An application referred to under subregulation (1) shall, in
addition to the requirements prescribed in sections 35(2) and (3) of the
(a) a letter of introduction from the chairperson of the village
(b) a sketch plan of the proposed building;
(c) proof of ownership of land in accordance with the Land
Act, including photocopy of certificate of title, power of
attorney from the registered proprietor or other satisfactory
(d) development permission from the Physical Planning
(e) at least two sets of architectural drawings;
(f) a boundary opening report from a surveyor;
(g) at least two sets of electrical drawings;
(h) at least two sets of mechanical engineering drawings;
(i) at least two sets of structural engineering drawings and
design calculations for both temporary and permanent
(j) proof of payment of application fees prescribed in Schedule
(k) any other document as may be required by the Building
(3) The application referred to in subregulation (2) shall be
signed by the applicant or his or her representative and shall be in
Form 2 set out in Schedule 3.
22. Application for building permit for complex structures or
(1) A person intending to carry out a building operation of a
complex structure or public building shall submit an application for
a building permit in accordance with section 35 of the Act and these
(2) An application referred to under subregulation (1) shall, in
addition to the requirements prescribed in section 35(2) and (3) of the
Act and regulation 21(2), be accompanied by the following, where
(c) a certificate of environmental and social assessment from
the National Environment Management Authority;
(d) an acknowledgement of receipt of the building plans by
the Commissioner of Occupational Safety and Health;
(f) a certificate of energy efficiency assessment from the
(g) proof of payment of application fees prescribed in Schedule
(h) any other document as may be required by the Building
(3) The application referred to in subregulation (2) shall be
signed by the applicant or his or her representative and shall be in
Form 2 set out in Schedule 3.
23. Receipt of applications for building permits
(1) The Building Committee may receive applications under
these Regulations in hard copy or electronic format.
(2) Where a Building Committee has capacity to receive
applications in electronic form, the Committee shall issue guidelines
(3) Where an application submitted under this regulation is
incomplete, the Building Committee shall return the application to the
(4) The applicant referred to in subregulation (3) may resubmit
the application to the Building Committee where he or she has satisfied
the requirements of these Regulations and shall pay re-submission fees
(5) In the case of applications received by the Building
Control Officer, the Building Control Officer shall assess and make
recommendations to the Building Committee in relation to applications
for building permits in accordance with sections 33 and 35 (4) of the
Act using Form 3 set out in Schedule 3.
24. Notification of approval, deferral and rejection
(1) A Building Committee to which the application has been
submitted may in the exercise of its power under section 36(1) of the
Act, grant the building permit in Part I of Form 4 specified in Schedule
3 and may attach to the permit any conditions with respect to the
proposed building or work consistent with these Regulations.
(2) A Building Committee shall notify the Building Control
Officer of its decision in accordance with section 33 (c) using the form
in Part II of Form 4 set out in Schedule 3.
(3) Where the Building Committee issues a permit under
subregulation (1), the chairperson of the Building Committee shall
sign the permit and other documents and issue one endorsed copy of
the permit and other documents to the applicant.
(4) The Building Committee shall maintain records of its
proceedings as prescribed in Parts I and II of Form 5 set out in
In addition to the circumstances set out in section 40 of the Act, a
building permit may be revoked where—
(a) the owner of a building operation uses building methods
and materials that have been prohibited under section 42
(b) the professionals engaged under these Regulations are
replaced without notifying the Building Committee;
(c) the building operation is not in accordance with the
(d) the building operations have been suspended for more
26. Preliminary building permit enquiries
(1) A person who intends to carry out complex structures or
public building operations may, before applying for a building permit,
request the Building Control Officer—
(a) to examine a preliminary sketch or conceptual drawings
or plans of the proposed building operation and furnish
in writing his or her comments on the plans or on any
(b) to furnish, in writing, his or her opinion as to whether any
material, method or form of construction intended to be
used in the erection of the building complies with the Act,
these Regulations, the Code and other applicable laws; or
(c) to advise on the requirements for approval.
(2) Where the Building Control Officer is unable to comply
with the request in subregulation (1), the Building Control Officer
shall notify the applicant in writing stating the reasons for his or her
Building Site Operation and Management
27. Notice of commencement and completion of certain stages of
(1) A person shall not commence a building operation prior to
giving a notice in writing to the Building Committee specifying the
date on which the building operation shall commence.
(2) The notice referred to under subregulation (1) shall be
(a) to the Building Committee at least fourteen days in the
(b) to the Building Committee at least seven days in the case
of erection of a building or regular maintenance of a
building including painting, redecoration or replacement
(3) The notice referred to under subregulation (1) shall be signed
by the applicant or his or her representative and shall be in Form 6 as
(4) A copy of the approved drawings and building permit shall
be kept on site and shall be readily accessible by the Building Control
Officer at all times during the building operation.
(5) A building operation shall not proceed beyond a stipulated
stage if the stage has not been inspected and approved by the Building
Committee or Building Control Officer, where that is a condition of
(6) The owner of a building operation shall use Form 7 set out in
(7) Where there is a condition in the building permit requiring
the owner to submit quarterly reports of the progress of a building
operation, the architect or engineer shall furnish the Building Committee
or Building Control Officer a certificate of stability of structure in
Form 8 set out in Schedule 3 certifying that the structural work of the
building is been carried out in accordance with the structural design
(8) The Building Committee or Building Control Officer may
give at least two days’ notice to the owner of a building operation prior
(9) The stages for inspection referred to under subregulation (5)
(ii) foundations excavated and level pegs for concreting;
(iv) trenches for drainage work excavated to levels and
(v) drains laid and joined and ready for testing;
(vi) reinforcing steel fixed in position before concreting;
(vii) concrete shuttering ready for striking;
(ix) roof frame-work completed before covering; and
(b) for reinforced concrete structures, elements or members
in all cases after reinforcement is in place, but before
(c) for structural steelwork, after erection but before cladding;
(d) for structural timber, after erection but before cladding;
(e) for suspension and resumption of building operations.
(10) Where a person is notified by the Building Committee in
writing of any contravention of his or her building permit during the
construction and is required to rectify the contravention, he or she shall
after completion of the rectification, notify the Building Committee in
(11) If the procedure laid down in subregulation (10) is not
followed, the Building Committee may by notice in writing, require
the owner to cut into, lay open or pull down as much of the building
work as may be necessary to carry out any tests and ascertain whether
the provisions of the Act, these Regulations and the Code have been
complied with, and at the cost of the owner.
(12) The Building Committee may carry out tests or inspections
(13) Tests or inspections under subregulation (12) shall be at the
expense of the owner of the building operation.
(14) A person shall notify the Building Committee in writing
(a) the erection of a building not more than seven days
after completion or if a building or part of a building is
occupied before completion, not less than seven days after
(b) any alteration or extension of a building, not more than
(c) the execution of works or the installation of fittings in
connection with a building, not more than seven days after
(1) A person shall not demolish, cause or permit to be demolished
any building without approval of the Building Committee.
(2) The Building Committee may impose conditions as are
necessary for the safety and health, convenience of the public and
safety of any building or installation which may be affected by the
(3) A person shall not leave a building or demolition site in a
(4) Where a building is left in a dangerous condition under
subregulation (3), the Building Committee shall require the owner
of the building to make the site safe and where he or she fails, the
Building Committee shall carry out the necessary work at the cost of
(5) The Building Committee may prohibit the use of any method
of demolition of any building where the method is likely to create
(1) The Building Committee may require the owner of the site
to erect a fence, hoarding or barricade to keep the public out and to
protect the public from activities on the site prior to commencement of
(2) The fence, hoarding or barricade shall be retained and
maintained by the owner in a safe condition until the work is complete.
(3) A person undertaking any building operation on any site
shall confine all operations in connection with the work within the
(4) The owner shall erect and retain a sign board for the duration
of the construction until work is complete, in the most publicly visible
position on the site indicating what the project is, together with the
name, contact information and registration numbers where applicable.
(5) The sign board referred to in subregulation (4) shall also
(c) the person with overall responsibility for the site operations;
(d) the architect responsible for overseeing the site operations;
(e) the engineers responsible for overseeing the site operations;
(f) surveyor responsible for the project; and
(g) any other information as required by the Building
(6) The Building Committee may, before or during the erection
or demolition of any building, impose any conditions in addition to
the conditions or requirements contained in these Regulations for the
purpose of safeguarding the interests of the public, and the owner of
the building shall observe the conditions.
(1) A person carrying out building operations may erect on the
(2) The construction and location of the sheds shall be to the
(3) The sheds shall be maintained in good order and condition at
all times during the building operations.
(4) The Building Committee may serve a notice on the owner of
the sheds requiring him or her within a time specified in the notice, to
remove, relocate, reconstruct, repair or improve the condition of the
(5) Security personnel employed in connection with any building
operation may be accommodated in the builder’s sheds subject to the
requirements and conditions as may be necessary for safeguarding
public health, avoidance of any nuisance and inconvenience to persons
in the vicinity of the building site.
(1) A person shall not commence any building operations without
installing sanitary facilities for personnel at the building site or at a
reasonably close location as approved by the Building Committee.
(a) be placed in such a position so as not to be offensive;
(c) be removed by the owner immediately after the completion
(3) Sanitary facilities shall be provided at the rate of not less than
one sanitary facility for every thirty people on the building site.
32. Excavations and measures for stability of site
(1) Where any excavation is carried out or is to be carried out on
any site which is likely to be unstable, measures shall be taken by the
owner of the site to ensure that stability is maintained.
(2) Where any excavation is likely to impair the stability of any
property or where the depth at any point in an excavation is expected
to be in excess of 3 metres and is not indicated on the approved
architectural and structural engineering plans, the owner of the site
(a) make an application to the Building Committee, in writing
for approval of the required structural temporary works
(b) take precautionary measures as may be specified by the
(c) maintain open excavations in a safe condition at all times
to the satisfaction of the Building Committee.
(1) A Building Committee may, in respect of any building which
has in its opinion fallen into a state of disrepair or neglect, and constitutes
a safety or health hazard to the public, or for aesthetic purposes, serve
a notice in writing on the owner of the building, requiring him or her
to carry out repairs or painting within such time as may be specified in
(2) Where a person notified under subregulation (1) fails or
refuses to carry out the repairs or painting within the stipulated period,
the Building Committee may carry out the repairs or painting at the
cost of the owner of the building.
34. Application for occupation permit
(1) A person intending to occupy a building shall apply for an
occupation permit, temporary occupation permit or partial occupation
permit in accordance with section 44 of the Act and these Regulations.
(2) An application referred to under subregulation (1) shall be
(a) at least two sets of as-built drawings for the building
(b) at least two sets of as-built electrical drawings;
(c) at least two sets of as-built mechanical engineering
(d) at least two sets of as-built structural engineering drawings;
(e) a certificate of fitness of the electrical installations issued
(f) a certificate of fitness of the mechanical installation issued
(h) any other document as may be required by the Building
(3) The application referred to under subregulation (2) shall be
signed by the applicant or his or her representative and shall be as set
out in Part I or Part II of Form 9 set out in Schedule 3.
(4) Upon receipt of an application for an occupation permit, the
Building Control Officer shall inspect the building prior to the issuance
of an occupation permit by the Building Committee.
(5) The Building Committee, where satisfied that the application
meets the requirements of the Act, these Regulations and the Code,
shall issue an occupation permit in Part I or Part II of Form 10 set out
35. Revocation of building occupation permit
An occupation permit may be revoked where—
(a) an owner of the building fails to take corrective measure
(b) the building is used for other purposes other than that for
(1) The Building Control Officer shall inspect buildings at
regular intervals to detect any deterioration or defects in the buildings
(2) The Building Control Officer shall apply Forms A, B and
C of Form 11 set out in Schedule 3, as appropriate, to undertake the
(1) A person aggrieved by a decision of the Building Control
Officer under these Regulations may appeal to the Building Committee
within thirty days after receiving notice of the decision.
(2) A person aggrieved by a decision of the Building Committee
under these Regulations may within thirty days after receiving notice
(3) The appeal shall be in writing with a copy to the Building
Control Officer or the Building Committee, as the case may be.
(4) The right of appeal to the Board under this regulation does
not take away the right of an applicant to appeal to a court of law and
the court may confirm, reverse or modify the decision of the Board.
(1) The fees specified in Schedule 4 shall be paid in respect of
the services or activities to which they relate.
(2) All application and permit fees shall be paid by way of
electronic transfer or direct deposit into the bank account of the
(3) The prescribed application fees shall be paid on or before
the day an application is submitted to the Building Committee and
prescribed permit fees shall be paid before the permit is issued.
(4) Subject to paragraph 15 of Schedule 4, the fees prescribed in
39. Deviation from approved plan
(1) Where any deviation is found necessary during the course of
construction of a building, an owner of a building operation may apply
to the Building Committee to continue with the deviation work.
(2) An application under subregulation (1) shall be accompanied
by the revised plan, drawing or diagram to cover the deviation, as
certified by the responsible registered professional.
(3) Where an owner of a building deviates from an approved plan,
drawing or diagram to a substantial degree in terms of plot coverage,
height, depth, other dimensions, structural system, or becomes non-
compliant with these Regulations, the Building Committee may revoke
the building permit for the building operations and require the owner
of the building to demolish and remove the building within a specified
time at his or her own cost.
Where the Board is of the opinion that a building operation is in
contravention of the Act, these Regulations or the Code or that such
building operations may result into public nuisance or risk of accidents,
(a) require the Building Committee to investigate the matter
(b) recommend to the Building Committee to stop the building
(c) proceed to take any legal action in accordance with the Act
41. Compliance audits by the Board
(1) The Board shall conduct periodic inspections of the records
and proceedings of the Building Committees to ensure compliance
(2) In the exercise of its functions under the Act, the Board
(a) carryout audits during and after building permit approval
process, and compliance audit after the completion of the
(b) develop a capacity building strategy for Building
Committees and other stakeholders involved in building
(c) require any information, documents, records and reports
in respect of any aspect of the building permit approval
process where an appeal has been lodged against a decision
(d) summon witnesses, call for the production of plans,
documents, and examine witnesses and parties concerned
for purposes of determining an appeal against a decision
(e) undertake investigations into a building permit approval
process or building related accidents; and
(f) act upon complaints by Building Control Officers,
Building Committees, or any person in respect of any
42. General offences and penalties
(a) fails to comply with the terms of a notice or conditions
(b) deviates in any material degree from the approved plan,
drawing or diagram without approval of the Building
(c) erects a building in contravention of these Regulations;
(d) hinders or obstructs a Building Control Officer or any
person authorised by the Building Committee in the
(e) submits a certificate, which is substantially false, incorrect
(f) fails to take out worker’s insurance as required by the
(g) being the owner of a building, occupies, uses or permits
the occupation or use of a building without an occupation
(h) causes any building to be altered or used for a purpose
other than the purpose shown on the approved plans of the
(i) uses a building for a purpose, which causes a change in the
commits an offence and is liable on conviction to a fine not exceeding
forty eight currency points or imprisonment not exceeding two years
or both, and in the case of a continuing contravention, an additional
fine not exceeding five currency points for each day during which the
(2) For the avoidance of doubt, a person may proceed under the
Workers Compensation Act, 2006 against a person convicted under
subregulation (1), where his or her actions result in the injury or death
A currency point is equivalent to twenty thousand shillings.
Complex structural forms; public buildings, multi storeyed
buildings more than 12m high, building complexes (mixture
of high social impact or to be located in sensitive ecosystem
Residential or commercial buildings; floor area >30m2; single
or multi-storeyed of up to 12m high of simple structural
form, boundary wall built of bricks, concrete or other solid
Minor and temporary buildings; Floor area <30m2; single
APPLICATION FOR BUILDING PERMIT FOR
To: The Building Control Officer
In accordance with the Building Control Regulations, 2020, I/we hereby
make an application for permission to carry out minor building works at
In the position indicated on the accompanying sketch plans.
(a) Name and address of the applicant.
Name and signature of applicant
In accordance with the Building Control Regulations, 2020, you are hereby
authorised to carry out minor building works with the following conditions-
(a) a letter of introduction as cover from the chairperson of the
(b) proof of ownership of land in accordance with the Land Act,
including the certificate of title, power of attorney from the
registered proprietor or other satisfactory proof of ownership;
(c) an approval of development by the Physical Planning
(e) any other document as may be required by the Building Control
APPLICATION FOR BUILDING PERMIT FOR TEMPORARY
(i) Name of contact person (where different from applicant): ____
Please indicate legal status of applicant (Attach certificate of
incorporation, memorandum and articles of association, where
Name Address Nationality Country of usual
3. Description of the proposed building operation
4. Description and location of site
(b) Name and address of the Structural Engineer:_____________
(c) Name and address of the Building Services Engineer:_______
8. Is the plot affected by any reservation or road lines? If so, are these
correctly and clearly marked on the block plan?
10. If there is any deduction in the original area of the plot on account
of road lines or reservation (please state the total area of the
11. If the work is in connection with an industry—
(a) briefly describe the main and ancillary processes___________
(b) state the nature and quantum of industrial waste/effluents and
12. If the plot abuts two or more streets, information for all streets should
14. Are parking spaces for transport vehicles provided? _________
15. Does any natural water course pass through the land under
16. Is the plinth level proposed to be the level of the surrounding ground
I declare that the details stated above are true and correct to the best of
Authorised signature and seal of applicant
(a) development permission from the Physical Planning Committee;
(b) a boundary opening report from a surveyor;
(e) services drawings showing locations of proposed and any
(f) electrical and mechanical engineering drawings showing
proposed points of connection including lightning protection
(h) structural engineering drawings and design calculations for
both temporary and permanent works;
(i) proof of ownership of land in accordance with the Land Act,
including the certificate of title, power of attorney from the
registered proprietor or other satisfactory proof of ownership;
(j) a certificate of environmental impact assessment from the
(k) building operations and works engineering construction
certificate from the Commissioner of Occupational Safety and
(l) a certificate of approval of electrical or mechanical engineering
drawings showing fire detection, protection and fighting by the
(m) a certificate of approval of change of development by the
(o) certificate of energy efficiency assessment from the Ministry
RECOMMENDATION TO THE BUILDING COMMITTEE
In accordance with the Building Control Regulations 2020, I confirm that the
building plans mentioned below have been scrutinised and comments made.
* Indicate the Plot No., Block No., street/road, district, building classification,
building name, owner and address, estimated value of construction in Uganda
shillings, and approval fees submitted in Uganda shillings.
In accordance with the Building Control Regulations 2020, we confirm the
building plans mentioned below have been approved.
1. The passing of this plan operates as an approval for the purposes of
the requirements of the Building Control Act, 2013 and the Building
2. Where the proposals shown on the plan have not been commenced
within twelve (12) months of the date of this approval or are not
completed within thirty-six months from the date on which the building
operation was commenced, this approval shall be lapse and carrying
out of any work after such lapse will constitute a contravention of the
NOTIFICATION TO BUILDING CONTROL OFFICER OF
To: The Building Control Officer
comment sheet and the
* Indicate the Plot No., Block No., street/road, district, building classification,
building name, owner and address, estimated value of construction in Uganda
shillings, and approval fees paid in Uganda shillings.
RECORD OF PROCEEDINGS OF BUILDING COMMITTEE
PART I- MINUTES OF BUILDING COMMITTEE MEETINGS
PART B: SUMMARY OF SUBMISSIONS CONSIDERED AND BUILDING
* Indicate the Plot No., Block No., street/road, district, building classification,
building name, owner and address, estimated value of construction in Uganda
shillings, and approval fees paid in Uganda shillings.
NOTICE OF COMMENCEMENT OF BUILDING OPERATIONS
To: The Building Control Officer/Building Committee
In accordance with the Building Control Regulations, 2020, I/we hereby
give notice of commencement of building operation of demolition*,
erection*, extension* of building or part thereof at-
(c) Actual date of commencement and estimated date of completion
NOTIFICATION OF REQUIREMENT FOR INSPECTION
To: The Building Committee/Building Control Officer
In accordance with the Building Control Regulations, 2020, I/we hereby give
notice of the requirement for a building inspection at-
For Official Use Only
In accordance with the Building Control Regulations, 2020, I hereby certify
that the structural work of the building mentioned below is been carried out
as per the structural design and details and that the said structure is safe and
stable for the purpose for which is intended.
Name and signature of Structural
PART 1-APPLICATION FOR TEMPORARY OCCUPATION
PERMIT OR PARTIAL OCCUPATION PERMIT
In accordance with the Building Control Act, 2013, I hereby apply for a
Temporary Occupation Permit*, Partial Occupation Permit for the building
mentioned below for the purposes or, purpose endorsed on plan mentioned
I certify that a qualified Engineer called _______________has supervised the
erection and completion of the building and that to the best of my knowledge
and belief the work is in accordance with the building and structural plan and
(a) certificate of fitness of the electrical installation issued by an
(b) certificate of fitness of the mechanical installation issued by an
(d) fee for temporary occupation permit or partial permit
Kindly process the application and indicate when the building control officer
will inspect the site
Signature of Applicant Name of Applicant
APPLICATION FOR FULL OCCUPATION PERMIT
In accordance with the Building Control Act, 2013 and the Building Control
Regulations 2020, I hereby apply for an Occupation Permit for the building
mentioned below for the purposes or, purpose endorsed on plan mentioned
I certify that a qualified engineer/architect called ……………… has
supervised the erection and completion of the building and that to the best of
my knowledge and belief the works are in accordance with the building and
structural plan and that I accept full responsibility accordingly.
(a) 2No sets of as-built drawings for the building layout;
(c) 2No sets of as-built mechanical engineering drawings;
(d) 2No sets of as-built structural engineering drawings;
(e) certificate of fitness of the electrical installation issued by an
(f) certificate of fitness of the mechanical installation issued by an
(h) fee for full occupation permit.
Kindly process the application and indicate when the building inspectors
Name of Applicant Signature of Applicant
TEMPORARY OR PARTIAL OCCUPATION PERMIT
In accordance with the Building Control Act, 2013, I confirm that the building
mentioned below may be occupied temporarily* OR part of the building*
mentioned below may be occupied for the purpose indicated below and for
the time period indicated below* -
Duration of Temporary Occupation Permit/Partial Occupation Permit*: ----
of temporary or part occupation subject to renewal upon application to the
In accordance with the Building Control Regulations, 2020, we confirm the
building mentioned below may be occupied/made use of for the purpose
Under the Building Control Act, 2013, it is mandatory of building to be
inspected at regular intervals by Building Control Officer to detect any
deterioration or defects in the buildings and the surrounding areas.
Take notice that the Building Control Officer shall proceed to
inspect the above described building on the ____________day
1. As required under the Building Control Act, 2013, the Building Control
(Building Control Officer) have carried out a visual inspection of
the above building and the surrounding areas from ____________to
(a) no sign of defects of structural significance were observed*.
(b) defects requiring monitoring but not structural investigation
and remedial action (if any) were visible to me in the building
(c) signs of possible defects of structural significance are detected
in the building during my inspection. A full and immediate
investigation to ascertain their effects on the structure is
(d) the defects are serious and immediate action to prevent danger
* delete whichever is not applicable
Control Officer) have inspected work carried out on the above building
and surrounding areas as set out in the attached report.
2. I hereby certify that defects as identified in the report dated
FEES IN CONSIDERATION OF SCRUTINY OF PLANS, PERMITS
1. The fees in consideration of the scrutiny of plans, permits and inspection
shall be published from time to time by notice in the Gazette.
Fees for the consideration of plans submitted for approval in respect of
new buildings shall be calculated on the basis of the gross area of the
proposed development using a per square meter rate.
In respect of plans of a building submitted for approval on a temporary
year to year basis and tentative sketch plans submitted for approval
in principle, fifty percent (50%) of the rate applicable in paragraph 2
4. Sheds with open sides
For plans submitted for approval of a shed type of building having all
its sides open, fifty percent (50%) of the rate applicable in paragraph
For plans submitted for approval of a basement exceeding 2.5 metres
in height which are open on all sides (except where retaining walls
occur) fifty percent (50%) of the rate applicable in paragraph 2 shall
For every building of a warehouse or go down class of which no part
is intended for habitation (other than provision for a watchman) and
which is not constructed in reinforced concrete or structural steel, fifty
percent (50%) of the rate applicable in paragraph 2 shall be payable.
(a) For plans submitted for approval of alterations to existing
buildings, one hundred and twenty five percent (125%) of the
rate applicable in paragraph 2 shall be payable.
(b) Where the alterations to an existing building are generally
spread over the whole area of the building, then the fee payable
shall be computed on the whole area of the building, but if a
clear subdivision of the building is not affected by the alteration
scheme, such unaffected subdivision shall be excluded from the
area on which the fee shall be computed.
(c) Where a storey of any existing building is not affected by
alteration to the building, such storey shall be excluded from
the areas on which the fee payable for the alterations shall be
(d) Where alterations to an existing building involve an alteration
to the frontage line or elevation to a street (where such elevation
abuts a street) one hundred and fifty percent (150%) of the rate
(e) Where the alterations to an existing building involve only
subdivision - of rooms into smaller rooms, the fees payable on
submission of plans for such alterations shall be twenty five
percent (25%) of the rate applicable in paragraph 2 shall be
For plans submitted for approval of wharves, bridges, or other special
buildings, four hundred percent (400%) of the rate applicable in
For plans submitted for approval of a retaining wall, the fee payable
shall be twenty five percent (25%) of the rate applicable in paragraph
For a series or rows of buildings of the same plan and materials
when plans are submitted for approval at the same time, fees shall be
11. Amendment plan to an approved plan
(a) Where an amendment plan to an approved plan is submitted for
approval, a composite fee shall be determined by the Building
(b) Where an amendment to an approved plan involves an additional
area, then such additional area shall be charged on the basis set
(c) Where the amendments to an approved plan are in the opinion of
the Building Committee substantial, a fee equal to fifty percent
(50%) of the fee chargeable under paragraph 2 in respect of the
approved plan, shall be payable in addition to any fees payable
under subparagraphs (a) and (b) of this paragraph.
(a) An approved plan may be inspected in the office of the Building
Committee subject to the payment of a prescribed fee.
(b) An approved plan may be copied in the office of the Building
Committee subject to the applicant submitting with his or her
application to copy such plan with the written consent of the
(c) The fees shall be payable for the following-
(ii) for photocopying an approved plan; and
(iii) an endorsement by the Building Committee to certify any
(d) The fees in this paragraph shall be prescribed by Minister from
time to time by Notice in the Gazzette.
13. Permits for minor building works
Fees payable for minor erections, alterations and additions are at the
rate applicable under paragraph 2.
Fee for issue of a temporary certificate of fitness for occupation
under these Regulations shall be charged at the rate of 10% of the fee
Fifty percent (50%) of the fees paid on submission of plans shall be
refunded on application where a plan is withdrawn before decision
is made by the Building Committee within six (6) months of the
16. Additional copy of notice or permit
A fee will be charged for each additional copy of any notice, certificate
or permit as prescribed by the Minister by Notice in the Gazette.
17. Structural plans for plans submitted for approval of structural plans,
twenty five percent (25%) of the rate applicable in paragraph 2 shall
18. Building services plans, for plans submitted for approval of building
services plans, twenty five percent (25%) of the rate applicable in
19. Landscape plans for plans submitted for approval of landscape plans,
ten percent (10%) of the rate applicable in paragraph 2 shall be payable.
20. Renewal of plans for plans submitted for approval of renewal of plans,
twenty five percent (25%) of the rate applicable in paragraph shall be
NBRB Trains BCOs, DEOs and ISs on Building Control and
For 3 days, over 400 District Education to the Building Committee for review, Police Force and Proprietors of Private dormitories, strict monitoring and
Officers (DEOs), Inspectors of Schools copies of all applications for minor Educational Institutions Associations in inspection of schools, sensitization of
(ISs) and Building Control Officers (BCOs) building works and their decision on Uganda was constituted to undertake learners and school proprietors and
converged at Nile Resort Hotel in Jinja the application and to ensure that joint inspections of randomly selected improving the general security around
City for a training on building control any instructions given by a Building schools in the five regions of the country. schools ,among others.
and fire safety standards especially in Committee are complied with. They also
schools. They were drawn from the 11 inspect the erection and demolition of A total of 120 schools were inspected, The team was also taken through an
cities, 31 municipalities and districts any building. 50% of which were government owned online Fire Safety Self-Assessment
across the country. In her remarks, the Executive Secretary (30 being primary and 30 secondary) Kit developed by NBRB to facilitate in
of the National Building Review Board while the other 50% were privately owned assessing fire safety, safety readiness
The first 2 days, focus was on reminding (NBRB), Eng. Flavia Gutto Bwire (30 being primary and 30 secondary). and fire risk management of buildings
the BCOs of their role of scrutinizing reminded the BCOs of their gate keeping in schools. This kit can be accessed
architectural, structural mechanical and role in ensuring that building standards The study revealed that whereas all via https://firesafety.nbrb.ug.
electrical drawings and the use of the are complied with in their areas. the schools that were visited were
Building Industry Management System accessible by a fire tender, some of the The training was presided over by
(BIMS) an online platform that digitized “Most developers are illiterate and many buildings within some schools could the State Minister for Works Musa
the building control processes. professionals give them substandard only be accessed with difficulty. Only Ecweru who tasked the team for avoid
designs and drawings. It is therefore your three schools had carried out a fire safety lamentations of political interference
Section 32 of the Building Control Act,2013 role as BCOs to satisfy the developer and assessment by the time of the study. when executing their responsibilities.
directs the District Service Commission if you don’t do so, then you are part of the The Permanent Secretary of the
to appoint for each District Council and problem”. Eng. Bwire Noted. None of the schools had a fire hydrant Ministry of Education, Ketty Lamaro was
Urban Authority a Building Control Officer on site for fire emergencies; however, represented by the Commissioner Pre-
and such a number of Assistant Building On the third day, the BCOs were joined about 10% had a hydrant in the vicinity Primary and Primary Doreen Ankunda
Control Officers are necessary to enable by the DEOs and ISs for sessions about while 30% installed fire detection and Tumwebaze.
the Building Committees carry out their the fire safety standards in schools. alarm systems although they did not
functions under this Act. have adequate coverage. Only 13% NBRB Team
Between May 2022 and May 2023, a of the dormitories were well within
The functions of the BCOs are provided multi - sectoral team composed of the occupancy limits with one of the
for under section 33 as to make representatives from the Ministry of dormitories found with an excess of over
recommendations to the Building Education and Sports, National Building 70 pupils.
Committee in relation to building Review Board, Ministry of Gender, Labour
plans, specifications of materials and and Social Development, Ministry of The possible solutions to the fire
workmanship. Kampala and Metropolitan Affairs, challenges were suggested during
The BCOs are also supposed to forward Ministry of Local Government, Uganda training including de-congesting the
A team of District Education Officers, Inspectors of Schools and Building Control
Officers assessing fire safety standards at PMM Girls School in Jinja City.
Parents, school administrators and members of the general public are
now able to assess the level of fire safety preparedness in schools.
1. When different data about a school is entered and the fire protection
This is after the National Building Review Board (NBRB) a body under
rating is known, different school administrators can then proceed to
Ministry of Works and Transport mandated to monitor all building
implement measures to ensure the safety of children in their care.
operations, developed an online Schools Fire Safety Self-Assessment
2. Data from the tool can also be used by the Government of Uganda
to manage resources when implementing measures to curb fires in
The Tool is one of the mechanisms devised by NBRB to end the rampant
3. NBRB can also use the assessment from the tool to work with
school fire accidents that have led to loss of lives and property.
different MDAs and stakeholders when drafting policies that will
curb fires in schools and ensure safety of Uganda’s children in
Several investigations by the Board have noted that schools lacked
knowledge on how to protect themselves against fires. Therefore,
NBRB developed an online tool to help school administrators, the
Dennis Ojok, Senior ICT Officer, NBRB
public assess the fire safety preparedness of their schools in order to
come up with measures to improve protection against fires.
The tool has two assessment options; Public Assessment Module and
This is a provision for members of the public including parents where
without disclosing their identity can assess the fire safety of buildings
within a given school complex and get instant feedback so as to
enhance safety of the users of the buildings. It comprises of three
main sections; Particulars and location of the learning institution, the
overview of the school buildings, and the appraisal of the individual
buildings. The Module is open to the public and doesn’t require any
form of registration and can be accessed via https://firesafety.nbrb.
This option is designed for the school management to carry out an
appraisal of buildings within their school complex and get instant
feedback so as to enhance safety of the users of the buildings. It also
comprises of three sections; Particulars and location of the learning
institution, the overview of the school buildings, and the appraisal of
the individual buildings. This is restricted to school management and
requires one to first register, thereafter login into their dashboard
One of the school dormitories lazed down by a fire.
A quick scan around Kampala and in the countryside,
will lead to many buildings with asbestos roofs. These
are mainly public schools, barracks of security agencies,
hospital staff living quarters and public housing estates.
In June 2023 National Building Review Board (NBRB) in
line with one of its mandates of monitoring all building
development received a complaint from one of the
owners of the blocks in the Bugolobi Flats. The Flats were
constructed in the late 60’s and early 70’s by National
Housing and Construction Company Ltd and have since
been sold off to private owners under the condominium
A task force was then constituted with an objective
of ascertaining the compliance of the architectural,
elements of the development with the Building Control
Framework and made recommendations purposed
to improve the safety of the establishment and in the
The task force found, among others that the plumbing
system of one of the Blocks that the drainage pipework
was of asbestos material encased in concrete. Although
it was revealed that some of the pipework had been
replaced with PVC, the extent of replacement could not
be confirmed. The findings that we still have asbestos
in our built environments should be a concern to all An asbestos roof at one of the schools in Kampala, Courtesy Photo
material is broken, deteriorating or when it is being Way forward
Asbestos has been characterized as a hazardous material
under schedule 3 of the National Environment (waste nailed/hammered during installation, in which 1. Building committees in their areas to identify
management) Regulations, 2020. The use of asbestos case airborne asbestos fibres are produced. People all buildings which have elements made out of
for plumbing, or roofing is a health hazard, which should are most likely exposed to asbestos fibres by asbestos, and to ascertain their condition.
breathing in fibres that are suspended in air. People
be addressed by all. 2. Building Committees should require developers
may also swallow the fibres if the asbestos enters
with Asbestos components to replace those
drinking water, which is possible in areas where
Asbestos was declared a human carcinogen by the components as soon as possible, to protect the
water harvesting is done off old and deteriorated
World Health Organisation after establishing that public and the environment. The demolitions
asbestos roofing. Those involved in demolition
inhaling even small amounts of the airborne fibres could and replacements should commence only after
works, building repairs and maintenance may be
cause lung cancer, mesothelioma (type of cancer that obtaining building permits from the Building
exposed to higher levels of asbestos as disturbing
develops in the lining that covers the outer surface of Committees.
these materials releases fibres into the air.
some of the body’s organs) and asbestosis (a chronic
3. Building Committees should liaise with the
lung condition that is caused by prolonged exposure
The situation is further complicated by the long Environmental Officers and NEMA on the proper
to high concentrations of asbestos fibers in the air).
latency period (time between asbestos exposure disposal methods of the decommissioned
Asbestos exposure has also been linked to cancer of the
and the manifestation of diseases) which poses a asbestos to prevent the release of fibres into the
challenge in terms of health surveillance. air and water, potentially affecting ecosystems
The best way of tackling the risk of asbestos is to
infrastructure, and products degrade over time,
eliminate it from our built environment. Anthony Rucukye,
potentially releasing harmful fibres into the environment.
The asbestos particles end up being inhaled by human
beings, causing numerous health issues. The presence
asbestos in buildings is a concern especially when the
From the onset the Physical Planning Committees deal with or any qualified Physical planners and recommend to the
physical/ land use whereas the Building Committees deal National Physical Planning Board development applications
with buildings. By supervision, physical planning committees for change of land use.
are supervised by National Physical Planning Board (NPPB)
under Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development The Physical Planning Committees also recommend to
while Building Committees are supervised by the National the District Council subdivision of land which may have a
Building Review Board (NBRB) under Ministry of Works and significant impact on contiguous land or be in breach of any
Transport. condition registered against a title deed in respect of such
land and approve development applications relating to
This distinction is further defined by the both the Building housing estates, industrial location, schools, petrol stations,
Control At, 2013 and Physical Planning Act, 2010. dumping sites or sewerage treatment, which may have
injurious impact on the environment as well as applications
Section 29(1) of the Building Control Act, 2013 defines the in respect of land adjoining or within a reasonable vicinity of
roles of the Building Committees as to scrutinize and approve safeguarding areas.
building plans, issue building permits and occupation
permits and ensure that the designs and construction of Other responsibilities include hearing appeals lodged by
buildings and utilities to which the public is to have access persons aggrieved by decisions made by the District Physical
cater for persons with disabilities Planner and Lower Local Physical Planning Committees
under this Act, ensuring the integration of physical planning
Other roles include, to review the decisions on applications into the three-year integrated development plan of the
for permits for minor building woks submitted to a Building district, exercising supervisory powers over planning
Control Officer, ensure that this Act is complied with and committees, and ensuring integration of social, economic
perform any other functions assigned to it by the board. and environmental plans into the physical development
For the Physical Planning Committees however, their roles
are defined under sections 10,12 and 14 of the Physical NBRB Team
Planning Act, 2020. The roles include; causing to be
prepared local physical plans through its officers, agents
Understanding Building Control Fees
There have been numerous concerns over the building fees paid by a they are for scrutinizing building plans and inspecting site for due diligence
developer for building and occupation permits and for inspection of a to ensure that the documents submitted are authentic.
building operation. Some developers have ended up paying less or more During construction, the building committee must inspect the construction
than the stipulated fees. to ensure that the developer is complying with the approved plans and
regulations. Like building permits, these fees are determined according to
Let’s start with the building permit fees; Under section 34(1,2) of the Building square meters, location and classification of the building.
Control Act, 2013 a person shall not carry out a building operation without a
valid building permit issued by a building committee and any contravention For class A and B in cities, 1000 shilling is paid per square meter as inspection
attracts a contravenes a fine not exceeding 1,000,000 or imprisonment not fees, 750 in municipalities, 500 in town councils and 300 in districts. For Class
exceeding 2 years or both. C buildings. These fees are paid annually for the duration of the building
Among the requirements before a building permit is issued is the payment of permit.
the building fees provided for under the Building Control (Fees) Regulations, The after-construction inspection fees are captured under occupation
2020 issued by the Minister of Works and Transport Gen. Edward Katumba permit fees.
How Building Permit Fees are Determined Under section 44 of the Building Control Act, 2013, upon completion of
These fees are determined in 3 ways: 1, according to square meters, location a building, the owner shall notify the building committee of the practical
of the building (City, Municipality, town council and district). 2, classification completion of the building in accordance with the approved plans and
of the building that is (Class A, B and C). regulation and apply for an occupation permit.
Class A: Complex structures including public buildings, multi storeyed The building committee shall within 14 days examine the building and may
buildings more than 12 meters high, building complexes (mixture of all) such if satisfied that the building erected conforms with the approved plans and
as schools, hospitals, shopping malls, buildings of high social impact or to be regulations issue and occupation permit or refuse with reasons in writing to
located in sensitive ecosystem among others. issue the permit, if the building does not comply.
Class B; Residential or commercial buildings with floor area of above 30 Occupation permit fees are also determined according to square meters,
square meters and up to 12 meters high, boundary wall built of bricks, location and classification of the building.
concrete or other solid material of permanent nature.
With Class A and B in cities, 1,200 is paid per square meter, 950 in municipalities
Class C; Minor and temporary buildings with floor area of less than 30 square 700 in town councils and 500 in districts. And for Class C Buildings, a flat
meters such as single storey buildings of simple structural form. rate of 30,000 is charged across the cities, municipalities, town councils and
In cities, for Class A buildings, 2200 shillings is charged per square meter of It is criminal to occupy a building without an occupation permit and is
floor area, 1700 in Municipalities,1,300 for town councils and 1,100 in districts. liable on conviction to a fine not exceeding 480,000 shillings. However,
For Class B buildings 1,700 is required per square meter of floor area in the building committee may issue an occupation permit in respect of a
cities,1,300 in municipalities,1,000 in town councils and, 950 in districts. partially completed building where it determines that the building is safe
and adequate for human habitation. Such a permit shall only be valid for a
And for Class C buildings a flat rate of 500,000 is paid in cities,300,000 in period not exceeding 2 years and may be renewed upon application to the
municipalities, 200,000 in town councils and 30,000 in districts. building committee.
Upon issuance of building permit, the developer shall commence How do you pay.
construction with 1 year and complete with in 5 years. However, due to All applications and permit fees shall be paid by way of electronic transfer
unforeseen circumstances, if a developer is unable to complete the building or direct deposit into the bank account of the relevant local government as
with the specified time, they can apply to the building committee for an stipulated by Regulation 38 of the Building Control Regulations, 2020.
extension. For minor building operations, commencement shall be within 6 The application fees are paid on or before the day an application is submitted
months, though an extension another 6 months can be granted. to the Building Committee while the permit fees are paid before the permit is
issued. All these fees are nonrefundable.
Inspection fees a paid pre-construction, during and after construction of a Herbert Zziwa, Manager Communications, NBRB
Pre-construction fees are captured together with building permit fees and
CITIES MUNICIPALITIES TOWN COUNCILS DISTRICTS
Class A and B- building permit- fee for new buildings
(Fee in Uganda shillings per square meter)
Class A Class B Class A Class B Class A Class B Class A Class B
Scrutinising of drawings, plans and documents
including verifying of applications for building permits
Class C- building permit-fee for new buildings (Flat
S/N CITIES MUNICIPALITIES TOWN COUNCILS DISTRICTS
Scrutinising of drawings, plans and documents
including verifying of applications for building permits
Class A and B- building inspection-fee for new
CITIES MUNICIPALITIES TOWN COUNCILS DISTRICTS
buildings (fee in Uganda shillings per square meter
of floor area per annum for the duration of a building
permit) Class A Class B Class A Class B Class A Class B Class A Class B
FEES FOR ISSUANCE OF BUILDING OCCUPATION PERMIT
CITIES MUNICIPALITIES TOWN COUNCILS DISTRICTS
Class A and B- occupation permit- fee for new
buildings (Fee in Uganda shillings per square meter)
Class A Class B Class A Class B Class A Class B Class A Class B
Scrutinizing of drawings, plans and documents including
verifying of applications for occupation permits
Class C- occupation permit-fee for new buildings
S/N CITIES MUNICIPALITIES TOWN COUNCILS DISTRICTS
Scrutinizing of drawings, plans and documents including
verifying of applications for occupation permits
FEES FOR ISSUANCE OF PERMITS FOR OTHER BUILDING OPERATIONS
Fees for other building operations (Flat rate in Uganda
S/N CITIES MUNICIPALITIES TOWN COUNCILS DISTRICTS
6 Renewal and resubmission of plans
8 Alterations to existing building- front
Schedule 4 of the Building Control Regulations, 2020 shall apply
9 Alterations involving room subdivision
What you need to know about Building Permits.
Before engaging in a building activity Where it is intended that the public shall date of issuing the building permit and
in any part of the country, a developer have access to the building, the structural must be completed with in a period of 60
must have a building permit issued by the details necessary for the Building months (5 years). However, the Building
building committee. Section 34(1-2) of Committee to determine the structural Committee may extend the Building
the Building Control Act, 2013 prohibits a safety of the proposed building will be Permit depending on the circumstances.
person to carry out any building operations needed. Other requirements included
unless that person has a valid building proof of payment of application fee and Can a person be denied a Building
permit. A person who contravenes this any other document as may be required Permit?
section is liable upon conviction to a fine by the Building Committee. The Building Committee can refuse to
or imprisonment not exceeding 2 years or issue a building permit where a building
both. Permits for Residential or Commercial operation may cause a change in land
Building Operations. use, may result in degradation of the
So, what do you need to acquire a All the requirements for temporary and environment, may cause deprecation in
Building Permit? minor building operations will be required value of the adjoining or neighbouring
A developer who intends to carry out apart from the sketch plan. The developer properties, maybe dangerous to life or
a building operation has to apply for will also be required to submit at least property, may result in a building which is
a Building Permit from the Building two sets of architectural drawings, a a nuisance to occupiers of neighbouring
Committee of his/her area, that is; the boundary opening report from a surveyor, properties or doesn’t not comply with the
District or Urban Authority Building at least two sets of electrical, mechanical requirements of the Building Control Act.
Committee. and structural engineering drawings and
design calculations for both temporary However, where a person is not satisfied
The Building Control Regulations, 2020 and permanent works. with the decision of the Building
classify Building Permits as permits Committee, he or she has a right to appeal
for Minor building works, permits for Permits for Complex Structures to the National Building Review Board or
temporary building operations, permits All requirements for residential or to a court of law.
for residential or commercial building commercial buildings are applicable
operations and permits for complex here. These will be accompanied with Revocation of the Building Permit.
structures of public building operations. a geotechnical investigation report, The Building Committee may revoke
a hydrological investigation report, a building permit where a developer
Minor Building Works a certificate of environmental and uses prohibited building methods
A developer is required to obtain a letter social assessment from the National and materials, replacing professionals
from the chairperson of the village council Environment Management Authority, without notifying the building committee,
where the building operation is located, an acknowledgement of receipt of the deviation from the approved plans or
proof of land ownership in accordance with building plans by the Commissioner of where building operations have been
the Land Act, development permission Occupational Safety and Health, a traffic suspended for more than 12 months.
from the Physical Planning Committee, impact assessment and a certificate of
a sketch plan,proof of payment of energy efficiency assessment from the Occupation Permit.
application fees and any other document Ministry responsible for energy. Upon completion of a building the owner
as may be required by the Building Control is supposed to apply for an occupation
Officer. For minor building works, a developer permit from the Building Committee.
is supposed to commence building The Occupation Permit is used after the
Permits for Temporary Building operations with in 6 months though the Building Committee is satisfied that the
Operations Building Control Officer may upon request erected building is in conformity with
For such permits a site plan with detailed from the developer extend the period for the approved plans and regulations. It is
architectural drawings to enable the another 6 months. punishable to occupy a building without
Building Committee to determine the an occupation permit.
size, form, materials of construction and For other categories, building operations
use of the proposed temporary building. must start with in 12 months after the NBRB Team
Decline of Professional Values, Morals and
Despite being on the correct path to attainment of established in 2018 and mandated by the Building whose results they can’t ably interpret, those who
the Middle-income status, Uganda according to the Control Act, 2013 and Regulations thereunder to do not adequately supervise construction works
Uganda National Planning Authority (UNPA) faces an among others investigate building accidents. Whereas despite engagements by developers, this is unethical.
eight-million-unit housing shortage with an estimated the causes of building accidents have often been Professionals should understand that they owe a duty
300,000 housing units needed per year. Furthermore, established as poor construction methods and of care to their clients and the nation.
to support the government’s prioritization of policies workmanship; Inadequate inspection and supervision
favoring industrialization, the industries and service and Inadequate Quality Assurance, it is important to Therefore, there is a need for professionals to adhere
providers shall need larger and more modern sites, note that these are all rooted in the collapse of values, to required ethics and due diligence during the design
such as safe industrial zones to operate. To bridge these morals and ethics among the different construction and construction of buildings.
gaps, the construction of commercial and residential industry players especially the professionals.
units is booming across the country. Eng. James Ssali
Since many of our developers are ignorant about the Senior Building Officer (Civil/Structural), NBRB
A study on construction accidents in Kampala building standards,designs and regulation, they mainly
conducted in 2014 at Makerere University established depend on the good will, intergrity and trust with the
that for every 100,000 workers on construction sites, professionals. It is therefore a breach of this trust when
84 suffer death due to building-related accidents while professionals do substandard works,
Architects and Engineers for example who design
The National Building Review Board (NBRB) was with total dependency on pirated software tools
A team of NBRB inspecting one of the buildings in Kampala
Are You Ready for the National Building
National Building Review Board is excited to unveil
the 2nd edition of the National Building Control
Awards (NBCA) 2024 under the theme Building
for Sustainability. This theme will have two sub
themes, that is, Technology and Harmony with the
Environment. The aim is to recognizing individuals
and organizations for their efforts in ensuring
compliance to the laws, regulations and standards
The awards are inclusive with all building
control officers, contractors and manufacturers of
building materials across the country being targeted.
All building types shall have to meet key indicators
for safety and convenience to all users including
differently abled persons (DAP), the elderly, the sick
and children. The seven categories include
The buildings under this category will include
those with complex structural forms, public
NBRB Chairperson, Emmanuel Male hands over the Building Committee- Cities and Municipalities Award to
buildings, multi storeyed buildings more than
Soroti City Leaders during the National Building Control Awards 2023.
buildings of high social impact or to be located in submitted to a building control officer, ensuring that Public Participation
sensitive ecosystem among others. the Act is complied with and performing any other Using an online assessment tool, the public will have
functions assigned to it by the Board. an opportunity between July- September to nominate
5. Building Control Officer Award buildings that meet the set requirements. The public
This category targets residential or commercial
will also nominate BCs and BCOs, contractors and
buildings with floor area greater than 30m2, This award shall be bestowed on the best performing
Manufacturers of building materials using specific
single or multi storeyed of up to 12m high of Building Control Officer (BCO) in the country. According
indicators provided in the online tool.
simple structural form; boundary wall built to section 32 of the Building Control Act, each district
of bricks, concrete or other solid material of council and Urban Authority shall have a Building
After public nominations, an independent panel
permanent nature. Control Officer who makes recommendations to the
of experts will be sent to the field to verify the data
Building Committee in relation to building plans and
3. Class C Building Award provided. Members of the panel shall be seconded
This category comprises of minor and temporary from Uganda Institution of Professional Engineers,
buildings of floor area less than 30m2, single They also forward to the Building Committee for Uganda Society of Architects, Institution of Surveyors
storey and of simple structural form. review, copies of all applications for minor building of Uganda, Uganda Police Force – Directorate of Fire
works, inspect the erection and the demolition of any and Rescue Services, Academia, Institute of Internal
building and carry out regular inspection of completed Auditors, Uganda and Partners.
This award shall be bestowed on the best buildings.
performing building committee (BC) in the
6. Building Contractors Award The first edition of the awards was held on 8th
country. Section 28(1) of the Building Control
December 2023 at Imperial Royale Hotel Kampala
The contractor plays a very big role in the realization
with 11 winners. The Minister of State for Disability
of the building product. This award is a recognition
at each District and Urban Authority. Section
Hellen Asamo, State Minister for Lands Dr. Sam
to contractors who have demonstrated excellent
29(1) of the Act, prescribes functions of the
Mayanja and State Minister for Public Service Mary
workmanship in line with the designs done by
Building Committees as, scrutinizing and
approving building plans, issuing building and
occupation permits, ensuring that the design and 7. Building Materials Manufacturer’s Award
construction of buildings and utilities to which This award shall be bestowed on the most compliant
the public is to have access cater for person with manufacturer that has demonstrated remarkable
Other functions include, reviewing decisions on technology that protects the environment, and value
applications for permits for minor building works addition/improvement to their materials.
Minister of Works and Transport Gen. Edward Katumba Wamala (5th right) and NBRB’s Executive
Secretary (4th right) with judicial officers of lower bench courts and State Attorneys for Kampala
Metropolitan during an engagement on the building sector at Speke Resort Munyonyo.
The Vice Chairperson of NBRB Eng. Betty Nakamya Leaders and residents of Entebbe Municipality attending Stakeholders in the Built Environment and the
(4th right) with media practitioners from Kampala Metropolitan a building control baraza at Works Grounds in Entebbe. Inspectorate of Government during a consultative
during a training on building control matters at Hotel Africana, meeting on the proposed checklist for buyers of
In an owner-driven construction project, the CRS/NGO may directly implement the
program participants are at the center of the construction works themselves through
construction activities. The program participants employing craftsmen and skilled/unskilled
are engaged in all stages of the construction laborers from the affected communities. In this
project from site selection and quality/progress case, CRS/NGO takes on overall responsibility
monitoring to final inspection of the completed for sourcing the construction materials,
structure. supervising the labor force and monitoring
quality and progress. The affected communities
Several variations of owner-driven construction
are engaged in site selection, design solutions
are listed below. These are not exclusive of
and monitoring, but not all program participants
may be involved in the construction activities.
combinations have been designed to suit the
(Also in this case, the program participants may
source some locally available materials, such as
In self-built construction, the program river sand, thatch, etc.)
participants undertake the construction
works themselves with technical assistance/
The construction materials are either sourced /
approach, the program participants are sourcing
the construction materials themselves on the
local market. The program participants and/
or CRS take on material delivery and material
The program participants may opt to employ
skilled laborers and craftsmen instead of
undertaking the construction works themselves.
In this case, the program participants take a
managerial and monitoring role. The construction
materials are either distributed by CRS/NGO
participants are sourcing the construction
materials themselves on the local market.
progress and compliance with the intended
Book B cover photo: Comutee de ciblage monitoring owner driven construction in Madagascar 2012, Photo by Jeanne Ella Andrianambinina
example 1: piloting community-based disaster The shelter design used affordable, locally
preparedness innovations in west bengal and available materials and promotes five disaster
Flooding is a way of life in much of rural India,
concrete pillars anchored on stone footing
where annual monsoon rains swell the river
at least 2 feet below ground level to provide
systems that crisscross large areas of the nation’s
with poor land planning and overcrowding, have 2. raised plinth: Compacted raised earth plinth
left millions of India’s rural poor facing recurrent at the main occupied space of the shelter. The
disaster, as flood waters wash away their plinth has a chicken wire-concrete finish to
livelihoods, their material possessions and their make it more resistant to water immersion that
homes, most of which are built of a simple mud accompanies extensive flooding;
construction without safe structural frame that
is highly vulnerable to flooding. Many villagers
two opposite corner pillars for lateral resistance;
have lost their homes several times in recent
years, in some cases up to 10-15 times in their 4. roofs anchored into the main pillar structure
life, creating a cycle of poverty that becomes with “J” hooks, nails and washers;
5. hipped roof, a four-sided roof that provides
The flood-resistant shelter project was one of greater resistance to high winds.
three components of a comprehensive disaster
risk reduction program in these villages. CRS’ The construction was partly done by skilled
emergency shelter expert worked with communities masons and partly by the participating
to identify their vulnerabilities to disasters and households themselves. The concrete pillars were
to determine priority actions to increase their prefabricated by local vendors and the structural
resilience to future flooding. frame was erected by local masons and skilled
labor. This included the fixing of the trusses and
A critical determinant of the ability to withstand roof sheathing. The participating households gave
floods is the presence or absence of a structural labor contribution in form of transporting the mud
frame to support the roof. Without a solidly to site, compacting the earth for the raised plinth,
grounded structural frame, the mud walls collapse excavating for the concrete pillars, lattice fastening
when they are saturated with water. and daubing of the wall infill, and application of
mud plaster finish to the walls. CRS and partner
technical teams managed the procurement and
model” – was developed with the community
distribution of construction material, and no cash
to make houses more resistant to floodwaters.
Normal construction practices were studied and
community discussions were held to identify
appropriate ways in which to modify and improve
the homes of the poorest families. One-hundred
and fifty-seven such shelters were built acrosstwo
states of West Bengal and Orissa at a cost of
A neighbor helps CRS program participant Purna Chandra
Dalai prepare a mud and straw mixture for his new home,
built to be flood resistant using techniques and materials
taught and provided by CRS. Photo by CRS
The communities were entrusted with the
responsibility of safekeeping and storage of
the construction materials – especially the
prefabricated concrete pillars and bamboos –
in the villages, as the affected area was not
To insure safe quality construction, CRS and
partner technical teams took on the quality control
of the prefabrication of the concrete pillars.
Construction training was conducted in disaster
resilient building techniques for the mason and
skilled labor while constructing a first demo
shelter for the most vulnerable households of the
communities. The participating households were
also trained on key construction techniques to Reinforced concrete pillar prefabrication site for the structural
be able to monitor their own construction quality. frame of flood resistant shelter.
A detailed, step-by-step, illustrated construction Photo Credit: CRS
guide – with photos and diagrams showing the
five key flood-resistant elements – was used to
The construction guide is available from shelter
• The visible change in circumstances to program
participant households, the poorest households
in the four target villages, motivated and
convinced others with greater resources to
replicate the design (Orissa: 18 new homes, 44
• As a result of this pilot project, CRS and
partner staff increased their capacity to develop
A neighborhood child looks on as CRS program participants
Dukhiram Dalai and his wife, Sukanti, decorate the doorway
• Constructing the model shelters in front of
of their new home in the village of Raipur in Orissa state.
the government offices led to government
acceptance of the design and buy-in. A result
of strategically involving the government is that
more vulnerable households will benefit via the
Owner creating the raised plinth around the concrete pillars.
example 2: transitional settlement program in
Tropical Storm Washi, locally known as Sendong,
made landfall on December 16, 2011, in Surigao del
Sur province on the north-eastern coast of Mindanao.
The tropical storm unleashed heavy rains, which
caused flash floods to a height of a two-story building
and landslides across the region. CRS launched a
transitional settlement program housing up to 2,000
households to bridge the gap between emergency and
For the physical design of the transitional shelters, it Transitional shelter on site in Cagayan de Oro
was essential that the shelters were moveable and Photo Credit: Seki Hirano for CRS
made minimal impact on the land. Thus CRS worked
with a local architect and engineer to design an
adapted amakan house. This type of house is an icon of
Philippine culture, as it represents the Filipino value of
“Bayanihan”, which refers to a spirit of communal unity
or effort to achieve a particular objective. The Amakan
House is inspired from the traditional Filipino house
house made from locally sourced materials, which is
ideally suited to the rural traditions and cultures. This
pre-Hispanic architecture was adapted to the tropical
climate of the Philippines and can be easily repaired
which frequent the country. The house is predominantly
House destroyed by flash floods
made up of amakan (bamboo or palm leaf weave; CRS
Photo Credit: Charisse Mae Borja for CRS
used palm) for the walls, and coco lumber, which is
durable and inexpensive, for the structural frames.
The following design parameters were important:
1. c ulturally appropriate: Allowed families more
privacy, used local materials, protected from rain and
2. re-locatability: A shelter can be carried from one
place to another by 20 persons or can be easily
dismantled and re-erected in another location.
3. s peed of construction: The shelter can be
4. economical: Total shelter cost, including all labor
Pilot construction of transitional shelter
Photo Credit: Andrew Schaefer for CRS
5. flexibility: Versions of the model can be applied
to relocated families and those returning to original
6. upgradeable: Shelter can be easily upgraded into
permanent homes, or dismantled and moved if
The effectiveness of a transitional settlement program
heavily relies upon the timeliness of response, cost
efficiency, quality of outcomes and quantity of program
participants assisted. Thus the logistics, procurement
and financial systems are crucial to the outcome of
the program. In this response, locally and regionally
procured material were ordered at a massive scale, and
systems had to be put in place. After a tropical storm in
Children playing in front of transitional shelter on
the rainy season, drying timber is an issue; also, limited relocation site
road access affected the delivery time and costs. Photo Credit: Seki Hirano for CRS
example 3: special operations Appeal
In response to the Indian Ocean tsunami in 2005,
CRS implemented a re-construction program in
Sri Lanka in Batticaloa, Ampara, Galle and Matara
districts. The response included a transitional shelter
phase where 12,616 T-shelters were built within the
first year, and a three-year permanent shelter phase
in which 10,713 permanent homes were constructed.
Water and sanitation facilities, community halls and
school rehabilitations were also provided.
CRS, with its Caritas partner, engaged in a
participatory design process with the community and
designed different model T-shelters, keeping in mind
the local traditions and cultural practices. Households
had the flexibility to move the doors/windows/select
the roof type, etc., and a series of design variation
were evolved in the process. Pilot constructions
were built to test the different designs and materials
performance. The designs were refined through
community feedback, and considerations were given
to local capacity, supply chains and feasibility of
The program participants received cash grants in
installments and were in charge of the construction
few cases, program participants invested additional
resources and added extensions or finishes such
Initially, a contractor-built approach was used Photo Credit: CRSt
unsatisfactory quality of construction and lack of CRS and partners worked with community members to
timeliness, as well as observations that local labor establish a system for release of payments, monitoring
was exploited by the contractors, led to a shift towards and quality control at agreed construction stages of
an owner-driven approach. foundation, sill, lintel and roof level, roofing, internal
Subsequently, the community led the identification of
effectively, homeowners received technical assistance
the required skilled workforce. They identified material
in monitoring the quality of the construction.
supply chains and suggested improvements to the
procedures. Homeowners and local skilled workers To facilitate accountability and transparency of
procured and stored the construction materials locally. payments, program participants were encouraged to
open bank accounts. Making payments through bank
The site planning and design process was also led
accounts had a number of advantages. It helped
to set up an efficient management and accounting
used their technical expertise to review the design
of payments. It created greater awareness among
and specifications, as well as the timeframe and
program participants regarding the overall cost of their
associated payment procedures. The building works
houses and how project money was being spent. It
were carried out by local skilled craftsmen for the
also minimized opportunities for corruption.
reinforced concrete frame, brickworks walls and timber
roof structure. The homeowner monitored the quality
and timeliness of the construction, and together
with CRS/partner technical staff, signed off each
construction stage, which triggered the release of
payments. To safeguard the quality of the construction,
local craftsmen received training in good quality
CRS and partners experiences showed that the shift
towards the owner-driven approach helped to revive the
local economy and support local construction skills. It
reduced exploitation of local labor experienced during
the contractor-built approach. Challenges of material
supplies and time delays were addressed through
The main challenges experienced were in quality
control of materials and construction, such as
educating the homeowners on quality issues and
• Providing maximum flexibility and choice to Photo Credit: Mehul Savla for CRS
participants of re-construction programs is beneficial
• Supporting families who had experienced
devastating loss to be active managers of their
“end-user”, on their responsibilities in monitoring the
construction process was key. Homeowners were
at first passive program participants, feeling they
should accept whatever was given; project team
encouraged their role in managing the process,
which helped increase sense of ownership.
• CRS/partners can add value to reconstruction
program by building upon available local skills
and resources as opposed to contracting work to Photo Credit: Mehul Savla for CRS
Typically the shelter team is led by a CRS
program manager and is composed of staff
with distinct skill sets at the CRS level and
highlight that an owner-driven construction
project will need a higher management and staff
input for project management. For example:
A stronger processing team to process finance
supervisors to guide and provide technical
material quality control supervisors (example:
at implementing partner level) explain the
participants and ensure that vulnerable groups
• Operational support team: This is often
the most overlooked team, but these team
warehousing) are critical players to the
Refer to B.15 for organizational structure
Diagram 2 gives an overview of all owner-driven
dIAgrAm 2: owner-drIven work stAge dIAgrAm
thIngs to consIder when (re)-constructIng In post dIsAster sItuAtIons
Community mobilization and training ... B.8
Tender selection and purchase order ... B.9
kooB summAry of tAsks Task 2: Agree on scope of participation with
b.3 concept desIgn Task 3: Develop construction training and
Task 1: Make field visits information/education material
Task 2: Initial community mobilization- Conduct
focus group discussions b.9 procurement – tender selectIon
Task 3: Reflect market assessments
Task 1: Compile a tender package for
Task 4: Draw up design solutions materials/supplies
Task 5: Develop detailed Bill of Quantities for Task 2: Set up consistent tender templates
Task 3: Conduct a tendering selection process
Task 6: Develop draft construction manual for for procuring materials/supplies
Task 1: Set up regular meetings
Task 2: Set up feedback system – Accountability
Task 1: Construct a pilot structure Task 3: Set up site safety measures
Task 2: Conduct an “open house” and evaluate Task 4: Facilitate changes and improvements
Task 5: Equipment and Materials Management
Task 3: Seek approval/agreement and Warehousing
b.5 scAlIng-up b.12 project controls – tIme, cost
Task 1: Community-led site planning and And QuAlIty
selection Task 1: Set up a project schedule (progress
Task 2: Obtain permission to build
Task 2: Set up cost control (budget tracking)
Task 3: Set up quality control (assures
Task 1: Produce technical design drawings and
specifications Task 4: Set up document control (records
Task 2: Produce Bill of Quantities (BoQ) /Unit
b.13 completIon And hAnd over
Task 3: Produce a construction brochure / Task 1: Conduct final inspection
Task 2: Re-verify the original target program
Task 4: Review technical design – Local participant group
Task 3: Hand over certificates
Task 5: Develop monitoring plan
Task 1: Introduce maintenance activities
trAInIng Task 2: Introduce disaster risk reduction
Task 1: Cluster program participants into procedures
Task 3: Evaluation and program participant
kooB summAry of outputs b.9 procurement – tender selectIon
Outcome 1: Quality supplier selected and
Outcome 1: Field assessments completed
and documented Outcome 2: Cost and delivery time clarified
participants capacity/ preferences to (re)-build b.11 sIte supervIsIon
Outcome 1: Good communication and
Outcome 3: Market survey for construction
material and labor evaluated
Outcome 2: Site safety measures agreed upon
Outcome 4: Design for pilot structure
specification, equipment, labor requirements, Outcome 3: Procedures to control construction
draft technical construction guide changes set up
b.4 pIlot/demonstrAtIon (demo) warehousing is staffed and set up
structure demonstrated and evaluated
Outcome 2: Improvements made and approved Outcome 1: Project schedule set up
procedures set up and agreed upon
Outcome 3: Quality control set up and agreed
Outcome 1: Reached site layout agreement
upon with program participants
with stakeholder and community
Outcome 4: Filing system set up
b.13 completIon And hAnd over
Outcome 1: Final inspection completed and
InformAtIon And boQ Outcome 2: Ownership certificate handed over
Outcome 1: Completed engineering package
for tender action/material procurement b.14 After completIon
Outcome 1: Maintenance procedure agreed
b.8 communIty mobIlIzAtIon And upon and established
Outcome 2: Disaster risk reduction training set up
agree on their scope of participation Outcome 3: Evaluation conducted
Outcome 2: Program participants have access
Outcome 3: Clear feedback system is set up
and agreed upon with community
kooB b.2 work stAge: plAnnIng b.3 concept desIgn
At the start, a construction program needs
The initial design process of an owner-driven a concept design to solicit input from key
construction program is an iterative process stakeholders (government, IASC cluster,
and will have to go through several stages. program participants, etc.) and to be able
The goal is to move from the concept design to evaluate initial designs and assumptions
to a demonstration structure/pilot as soon as formulated during the feasibility stage. The aim
possible to be able to test design ideas within is to design simple and achievable structures
the specific post-disaster context. without compromising the inhabitants’ safety
criteria: As explained in the introduction, this Also refer to initial design A.4
document does not include program participant
clear, participatory and transparent program www.sheltercentre.org/library
participant selection is absolutely essential
and should have been conducted during the
feasibility stage or even prior to that. Past summAry of tAsks
experiences have shown that absence of a
task 1: Make field visits
clear program participant selection process
task 2: Initial community mobilization – Conduct
can lead to serious conflicts between program
participants and communities. This process
task 3: Reflect market assessments
(participatory rural appraisal) tools like social task 4: Draw up design solutions
mapping could be used to see that vulnerable task 5: Develop detailed Bill of Quantities for pilot
HHs (households) are given priority. construction
task 6: Develop draft construction manual for pilot
This stage includes the following sub-stages:
tAsk 1: mAke fIeld vIsIts
Sub-stage: Concept design refer to B.3 Identify basic structure types in the selected
Sub-stage: Pilot/demonstration refer to B.4 communities through site visits and/or transect
structure walk. Field assessments are essential. If they
sub-stage: Scaling-up: Technical refer to B.5 have not been conducted in the feasibility stage,
design matched with social they must be conducted now (i.e., soil type/
Sub-stage: Technical design: refer to B.6 landmines, ”no built zones”, flood zones,
• What do people build with locally and why?
• Visit temporary structures that may have already
been constructed by owners or other actors.
• Investigate the type and value of materials
purchased, and find out how they were procured.
• Understand plans and capacities the affected
populations have in improving their temporary example: kyrgyzstan, 2010
In Kyrgyzstan, following ethnic violence and flooding
resulting in damage to 2,000 homes in Osh and
tAsk 2: InItIAl communIty Jalalabad provinces, a winterized shelter project
constructed 203 winterized transitional shelters
mobIlIzAtIon – conduct focus group
that could be converted into permanent homes.
Some of the program participants were trying
Engaging with the community and the program
to build a 50 sqm house with the construction
participants from the beginning is essential.
materials that were designed for a 28 sqm house.
Initial community mobilization should introduce These families decided it was more important to
the project to the community, collect feedback, them to recover their original house than to follow
the 28 sqm transitional house instructions. This
and discuss and agree upon roles and
was a challenge, as the end result was not a safe
responsibilities. This could be done through a and inhabitable house.
Make clear agreements with the program
participants on the scope of their participation,
Template of household agreement in Appendix 1
their responsibilities and the scope of the project.
Conducting focus group discussions with
affected community members is a useful tool
to gain important information on: what their
previous structures looked like, material used
to build them, and their cultural preferences.
Find out how they live: Understand aspects
sleeping in different areas, household size and
family structures, WASH facilities indoor or
Winterized extensions to existing structures
outdoor, cooking methods, climatic conditions, Photo Credit: Andrew Schaefer for CRS
• Identify and talk to households that have not
rebuilt temporary houses and find out why. example: nicaragua, 2012
• Identify and talk to household who have rebuilt
and find out how they started and why.
labor (market survey should establish labor
with the area and communities.
• Identify whether there is confidence in the
local construction practices after a disaster.
Are there changes required to make the new
construction more hazard resistant? How can
Community meeting to discuss site selection and design for a
flood evacuation center in Kum, Nicaragua
Photo Credit: Seki Hirano for CRS
Conduct market assessments on the production:
availability of construction materials on the Market assessment should identify the existing
local markets. If a market survey has been vendors in the local area and their willingness to
conducted during the feasibility stage, use
Try to set up a prefabricated column production
this information to select materials that
unit in the affected area so that monitoring
are readily accessible in large quantities,
and quality check can be done by the program
local craftspeople, environmentally safe and
Refer to example 1 in India for details
culturally accepted for construction. Identify
multiple vendors and assess their willingness
to participate. Having multiple vendors helps
to ensure uninterrupted material supply and
avoids monopoly. Regardless of the planned
Contact the emergency team for market
is essential; the more in-depth the better,
but even a rapid assessment will suffice. In
Refer to emergency market mapping analysis
addition, look for ways to use salvageable
tAsk 4: drAw up desIgn solutIons
Sourcing large quantities of timber can be a
Technical sketch drawings of possible design
solutions should have been made by the
• Are there any local, and then national, timber
need to be revised according to understanding
gained from the community and site visits. At
• Inspect the quality and request price for such
this stage, a “one size fits all” approach is not
necessary; it is best to make multiple design
• Where was the timber sourced? Do sustainable
solutions for different construction types, and
it is important to retain some level of flexibility
• Do legal timber certification systems exist in
in terms of materials, size and layout to cater
to different needs. (This can be done through
procure internationally. This can incur additional
costs for transport and import tax. Also, the time
Design options should give consideration to
• If sourcing timber becomes a major challenge,
children, cultural practices and opportunities
for housing improvements by the inhabitants
(i.e., adding of internal partition to give more
Technical drawing for transitional shelter in Port-au-Prince, Haiti
It is essential to clearly define what disaster- tAsk 5: develop detAIled bIll of
resilient construction techniques are to QuAntItIes for pIlot constructIon
be used. Design solutions must be safe The engineer/architect needs to develop
structures that are resistant against future a detailed Bills of Quantities (BoQ) for the
disasters as much as practically possible; chosen pilot structure and share it with the
consider flooding, earthquake, landslides, high procurement team to help them understand
winds. The principles of “build back better” exactly what materials need to be bought.
and ”safe, adequate, durable” are touchstones It is best to get the help of a local person/
for (re)-construction. partner to get local rates of material and to
establish a realistic cost estimation in order
Refer also to initial design-budget, timeframe A.4 to prepare the BoQ. The BoQ is an exhaustive
list of material specification, quantity and tools
Refer to Sphere Project, shelter and settlement required to construct the design. It also gives
section, www.sphereproject.org an estimated cost per shelter. The BoQ is
Reference for shelter projects for case studies,
Bill of Quantities (BoQ) template in Appendix 4
tAsk 6: develop drAft constructIon
guIde for pIlot structure summAry of outcomes
The engineer/architect and social staff should
outcome 1: Field assessments completed and
develop a draft technical assistance guide documented
manual on how to construct the structure,
which needs to be revised after the pilot has participants capacity/preferences to (re)-build
been tested. This should include step-by-step
outcome 3: Market survey for construction
construction processes in pictorial format material and labor evaluated
with examples of “dos and don’ts” in local
outcome 4: Design for pilot structure completed,
language, highlighting critical junction details including BoQ, cost, material specification,
and contacts for advice and assistance. equipment, labor requirements, draft technical
Extract from construction guide for transitional shelter
The purpose of the pilot construction is to:
• Show stakeholders a real, tangible sample
buy-in from different stakeholders. In some
• Seek program participant and craftsmen
feedback on the structure, ease and
difficulties in making such structures, any
modifications required, etc. Pilot construction of shelter for training local community and
craftsmen on cyclone resistant construction
• Demonstrate the appropriateness of the Photo Credit: Rumana Kabir for CRS
structure in regards to meeting Sphere
design drawings but it cannot
• Test the speed that these shelters can be
compare with being able to
built and the labor and skill requirements,
look, touch and walk around
as well as the technical assistance that is
• Identify improvements that should be made
task 1: Construct a pilot structure
• Reconfirm the level of skills required for task 2: Conduct an “open house” and evaluate
• Use as a training opportunity for builders.
DEMO shelters are frequently built by villages
or groups of villages to train skilled labors
tAsk 1: construct A pIlot structure
on construction techniques and orient the
The pilot construction should be built on the
community and program participants on key
actual site (or a program participants land), if
possible, by a group of skilled and unskilled
laborers, under the same conditions and
• Evaluate the safety and storage issues when
with the same equipment as planned for all
following construction. This will achieve a more
realistic assessment of the suitability of the
structure, actual cost, construction time and
labor requirements, and highlight what needs
When planning for a large scale project, it is
always worth investing time and funds towards a
pilot. If any improvements are identified, either in
the benefit of this finding will be multiplied by the
number of repetitions, resulting in better quality
construction, cost savings and increased program
participant satisfaction with the structures.
kooB “ Will program participants move • The acceptance of the structure by the
into these kinds of shelters? program participants.
It is the occupancy rate not • The time it took to construct.
• The cost, including improvements, that may
be necessary to make it suitable and safe.
• The construction skills required and the
usability of the draft construction guidelines.
the reason why. This can be shared with
partners, the cluster and government
agencies to ensure that there is a clear
reason as to why Sphere is not achievable.
In urban settings where land is scarce, it may be
difficult to achieve site area standards.
Pilot construction of transitional shelter in progress for post-
Contact shelter advisor for tools on feedback
tsunami shelter response, Sri Lanka
Refer to Sphere Project, shelter and settlement
And evAluAte pIlot structure
t-shelter: It is important to remember that the
• Government officials (politicians, zoning shelter is not intending to replace homes in their
folks, city planning/construction department) original state, but to provide a “bridge” to more
durable solutions. Consider the reusability of
• Program participants: men, women (different material and/or possibility to extend the structure.
coordination and harmonization of other
Once verbal approval is given by any authority,
follow up by getting written approval, especially
the wider context, such as WASH and other
• Implementing partners is advisable particularly for permanent
would be ideal. These document need to be
Appropriate feedback mechanisms should retained and filed.
be developed for each of these stakeholder
groups. Smaller groups or different approaches
at soliciting feedback in different forums may
be necessary. It is not uncommon and should
be accepted that there will not be a universal
is helpful to evaluate the pilot on:
kooB T-shelter construction: In many past b.5 scAlIng-up
experiences, in the absence of local authority
approval mechanisms, the Shelter Cluster and
Scaling-up owner-driven construction programs
affected community reviewed and endorsed the
is not a precise science, rather it is a social
process that will take time to refine to ensure
Seek written agreement from the land owners high-quality programming and management
in the form of a signed Memorandum of quality systems are correctly integrated into
Understanding. However, in some instances, the program. The social and technical units will
verbal statements can be the most one can need to work together to be able to scale up,
anticipate. If this is the case, be sure to record addressing issues and helping troubleshoot
such verbal agreements in the form of meeting problems as they come up. Effective teamwork
minutes. between the social and technical teams is a
Refer to B.5 for details Scaling-up needs:
The evaluation/approval process can take
time and planning; the scaling-up process • Clear role and responsibility between CRS
should be done in parallel. Factors that need and community
• Good assessment on capacity of the
• In kind material distribution: In this case, community and staff
tenders for construction materials should be
• A clear mechanism to receive complaints
and feedback from community
task 1: Community-led site planning and selection
• Vouchers distribution: Has a robust market
task 2: Obtain permission to build
assessment been done? Tender for
tAsk 1: communIty-led sIte plAnnIng
• Cash distribution: How will the cash be
Planning of the exact location of the structures
on the site is very important. Past experience
Contact emergency team for detail on in-kind has shown that it is extremely important to
material distribution, voucher or cash approach invest effort into this stage. The program
participants should lead this process with
Refer to B.7 for detail support from CRS/partner technical and social
staff to include their knowledge and feedback
into the proposed design. Key items to keep in
summAry of outcomes mind when selecting a suitable location are:
outcome 1: Appropriateness of proposed • Geo-hazard vulnerability (Is this new site
structure demonstrated and evaluated
outcome 2: Improvements made and final design
approved • Does the new site have drainage (storm
• Site leveling or clearance of debris required tAsk 2: obtAIn permIssIon to buIld
(e.g., destroyed structures, contamination, To the extent possible (especially for permanent
obtained from government, local authorities
• WASH considerations: Were WASH facilities
communities) to build on the proposed site to
If yes, to what extent can we rebuild or
the scope intended. In some cases, this formal
integrate construction program around these
• Not all local contexts have formalized building
• Existing vegetation, prevailing wind directions
• In many cases, after a disaster the local
• Current use of site by the community.
• Accessibility (roads, path, electricity, water, systems collapse or are not functioning, etc.
Therefore, it is important that CRS assists program
• Ownership of land. participants with needed documentations of the
project for submission according to the local laws.
example: nicaragua, 2012 This could include: Site plans/survey plans with
property boundaries/plot numbers and technical
t-shelter construction: In the case of transitional
shelters/buildings, permission may take more
informal formats as official processes are too
In the past, this has been a strategic reason
why CRS to opted for T-shelter construction.
design the possibility to demount and rebuild the
structures while leaving the building structurally
Transect walk with the community to select appropriate site for
flood evacuation center project in Kum located in the estuary of
Photo Credit: Seki Hirano for CRS example: philippines
essential to develop the site layout, plot sizes and
other consideration mentioned in close partnership
with the program participants, government officials
to benefit from their local knowledge, get program
participants’ buy-in and mitigate future grievances
In Philippines shelter response, the transitional shelter was
designed to be re-locatable and demountable
Photo Credit: Charisse Mae Q. Borja for CRS
lAnd use Agreement for responsibility of CRS. Large trees will not be
trAnsItIonAl settlement removed from the land during site preparation.
Seek written agreement from the land owners
Utility Connection . Provision of metered water
in the form of a signed Memorandum of
and electrical connection will be the sole
verbal statements can be the most one can
anticipate. If this is the case, be sure to record Drainage and WASH Facilities . Proper
such verbal agreements in the form of meeting drainage and WASH facilities are the sole
designed and tested before construction to
ensure suitable run-off of water. All latrines
constructed will have properly sealed septic
Project Documents. The land of the Land tanks.
Owner shall be used exclusively for the
purpose of building transitional shelters; Also refer to land ownership issues task 2 under
inclusive of toilets, bathing cubicles, hand point A.3
washing stations, clothes washing area, and
cooking area; and according to the goal and Land use agreement template (digital copy)
objectives as set forth in the attached project available on share point
Period of Agreement . The project shall be
implemented by CRS and the Church on behalf With squatters, sometimes “formalizing” an
informal agreement can actually put the program
of the Archdiocese of Cagayan de Oro. The
participant at risk of losing access to that land.
Land will be used for a period of six months, For example, in many situations, people have
renewable in six month increments. informal agreements such as “This land belonged
to my wife’s uncle and I have been given verbal
Safety . It is the responsibility of the Church to permission to use this land.” Formal interference
into these relationships may cause more harm
comply with all applicable laws, ordinances,
than good, violating these informal but recognized
rules, regulations and orders of any public
agreements. The program needs to take a clear
authority having jurisdiction over the safety of position on this issue and communicate effectively
persons or property or to protect them from to all stakeholders.
Injury or Damage . It is understood that
contracted in connection with this project
outcome 1: Reached site layout agreement with
including employees of CRS or its donors
shall not hold the Land Owner responsible for
personal injury or damage caused or sustained
Sale, Transfer and Mortgage . The Land Owner
agrees that the subject Land shall not be sold,
transferred or mortgaged to parties outside of
this agreement until such time as permanent
housing is available for program participants
residing in transitional shelters built on the Land.
Site Preparation . All site preparation, including
construction of access road and necessary
culverts and brush clearing shall be the
kooB b.6 technIcAl desIgn – tAsk 1: produce technIcAl desIgn
productIon InformAtIon drAwIngs And specIfIcAtIons
Defines what is going to be built. Produce
the architectural and engineering drawings
and structural requirements for the proposed
structure following the improvements made to
the pilot structure. Produce the engineering
task 1: Produce technical design drawings and package (see below for explanation). The
completed engineering package is the basis for
task 2: Produce Bill of Quantities (BoQ)/Unit Cost the next work stage.
If the project is in a new settlement where new
construction guide plots are created, then the site planning and
infrastructural scope of work is essential (WASH,
task 4: Review technical design – Local building
task 5: Develop monitoring plan In projects where the constructing is within the
owner’s plot of land, then an architectural and
Example of technical drawing, front elevation of transitional shelter in Philippines, 2012
CHARISSE MAE BORJA A PROPOSED CATHOLIC RELIEF SERVICES
what are technical design documents? Purchasing of design software (i.e., STAAD,
common problem associated with AutoCAD and
• List of design parameters (size, structural loading other drawing software, especially in countries
and resistance), list of drawings and assumptions with limited professional education and regulating
site plans and infrastructure plans design drawings and details from one design to
another without review. Design drawings should
be signed and stamped by a licensed engineer/
• Site plan (showing site boundaries, location
architect, who will in turn assume the liability for
of structure on the site in plan, access, north
any errors and/or omissions in the design.
Architectural and structural package
sections) The final BoQ is based on the final approved design
• Electrical, mechanical drawings (lighting circuits, drawings and specifications. The BoQ lists out
ducting, ventilation) all the materials and quantities required to build
• Material specification /equipment schedules the structure as drawn on the technical drawings.
• Detail drawings (showing important junctions, i.e., It determines unit costs. The BoQ is needed to
foundations, wall/roof junction) calculate total project costs and monitor the budget.
what is a unit cost Analysis (ucA)?
UCA is part of the BoQ. It itemizes material cost,
labor cost and equipment cost.
These estimated costs can be derived in several
Specifications describe the minimal construction 1) Use of a standard construction cost index
requirement to be achieved and describe the (i.e., R.S Means Construction Cost Index, etc.)
approved design in words and construction generally provides a lower accuracy estimate and
sequence. It must reflect the design quality, is not always available.
2) Unit costs based on an up-to-date actual local
mixing strength, alignments tolerances) and the
area market price survey are more accurate, but will
require more time and staff resources.
the total estimated construction cost =
For example contact CRS Shelter advisor
quantities x unit costs (materials, labor and
cost, make allowances for staffing /overheads/
what is part of the engineering package?
It collates all information relevant to the project
and is the core documentation for overall
construction project management, budget and The BoQ should be very specific so that the
timeframe control. It is essential to proceed to the procurement teams can procure the right
next work stages. It includes: materials. Many procurement staff will never have
purchased construction materials before, and they
• Technical assessment, field investigations, site do not know the difference between different kinds
contractor-built or a combination of the two
engineering team should verify the accuracy and
completeness of the engineering package to be
able to manage the construction works effectively.
PROJECT TITLE: Construction of 18 sqm elevated T-Shelter
ITEM DESCRIPTION QTY UNIT AMOUNT ITEM DESCRIPTION QTY UNIT AMOUNT
1 Concreting of Pedestal Col. 4 I nstallation of FloorJoist / Plywood Flooring
5 Roof framing / Roofing works
Materials coco lumber purlins 40 bdft 14 560.00
3 Fabrication and Installation of amakan Walling Sub total 5,903.00
Coco Lumber Bamboo Slat 1 bundle 80 80.00
BoQ with unit cost of 18 sqm transitional shelter in Cagayan
tAsk 2: produce bIll of QuAntItIes
Improve and finalize the pilot structure
BoQ to be very detailed: Include a list of all
and labor required to build the structure. The
labor requirements should include number
UCA: Determine the unit cost for construction
The CRS in-house engineer/architect and
procurement staff will revise the current market
cost per item after the pilot construction. It is
important that technical staff explain the BoQ
Program participant with T-shelter technical guide poster
A construction brochure and/or manual should
be finalized after feedback from the pilot
project has been used to improve the design.
This technical assistance is very important to
illustrate in a very simple and clear way how
to construct the shelter and how to monitor
the quality. This could include photos of the
illustrations and diagrams. It should highlight
key monitoring stages and give attention to
key details, such as safe joining of materials.
Contacts for help and assistance are a very
Illustrated technical guide for transitional shelter
construction in Padang, West Sumatra, Indonesia, 2009 It is essential to use communication methods that
program participants, who are building their own
houses, understand. Many methods have been
developed and tested. Contact shelter advisor for
construction (i.e., time for training in safe
tAsk 4: revIew technIcAl desIgn –
Permanent construction: Technical designs and what is part of a monitoring plan?
specifications should be reviewed for compliance It sets the basic requirements and defines
with local building codes and regulations or inspection standards of the construction works by
the engineering team/program participants and
accepted international codes where local codes
community. It is a very important tool to monitor
and regulations are not available or are below the quality of the construction.
acceptable standards. This can include a
• States the responsible individual for each of
combination of in-country local and international the inspection activities.
professional engineers and a wider review via
• Includes verifying documents for each
email/internet utilizing the CRS network of inspection activity consisting of inspection
Inspection reports that monitor day-to-day
• Includes breakdown of overall construction
Emergency/transitional structures must be process into different phases such as
designed so that if they do fail in a future completion of ground works (drainage/sewers),
disaster, they do not cause injury to the people.
Evacuation procedures should be known and wall structure) and finishes (internal/external).
practised. An emergency shelter advisor should
be consulted if there is not sufficient technical poster with pictures posted at the construction
expertise available in-country. site to inform/educate the construction
workforce on good and bad practices witnessed
during construction. Past experience has
proven that pictures help to communicate safe
This is particularly important in earthquake, high construction practices.
wind or flooding zones, where special construction
techniques and detailing are essential to build
safe and hazard-resistant structures. • “Hold points”– critical stages of the
construction work where construction is stopped
until inspection and quality certification is
provided from the engineering team and program
Reference: Uniform Building Code (UBC), participants. The hold points clearly describe
www.iccsafe.org what requires inspection. They are particularly
important where on-going construction would
otherwise conceal completed works (i.e.,
Reference: hazard resistant construction, reinforcement and pouring of foundations,
www.sheltercentre.org/library columns and support beams; installation of
Contact shelter advisor for review of technical
indirect inspection, to verify conformance with
tAsk 5: develop monItorIng plAn
• Owner-driven permanent construction should
This is a tool that defines the procedures to be
used to monitor the quality of the construction with a retention withheld (5%) to repair any minor
works and the progress . Ideally, it is divided into issues that arise during this period.
the different construction stages (foundations
the technical design, material specifications
and specific considerations for owner-driven
kooB A monitoring plan is a communication tool b.7 work stAge:
to use with the local community/program procurement And
the inspection procedures, assist them in
achieving accountability and raise awareness
This stage includes the following sub-stages:
for safe construction. An induction meeting
with the community should explain the process Sub-stage: refer to B.8
Reference to B.12 for more details on quality selection and purchase order
The procurement work stages are necessary
Contact shelter advisor for examples and steps to establish:
• The appropriate labor arrangement to
construct (this could include combinations of
the program participants themselves, skilled
outcome 1: Completed engineering package for
• The tendering for construction materials to
establish availability, cost and lead times.
It includes the scope of works, technical design
drawings, specifications, BoQ/UCA, construction • Placing purchase orders and developing
brochure building, code compliance note and
In the past, CRS has used different options to
source the materials and labor necessary:
A . CRS directly built, by procuring material and
In situations where land tenure is not certain,
relocation sites, program participants may
not be able to build their own shelters. In
to construct and to procure and store
B . In-kind material distribution to program
participants with labor contribution by the
program participants and/or cash for work
In post-disaster situations where construction
materials are not readily available on local
markets or it is necessary to have a very
prescriptive design and material selection, it
may be necessary to procure materials and
distribute items in-kind to program participants
In this case, it is essential to asses if the example: west sumatra, 2009
community has the necessary skilled labor. If
this is not the case, some form of cash grant
can be considered for the program participants
to manage the construction and payment of
skilled laborers. The program participants
often are in a position to negotiate better
C . Material voucher distribution to program
participants with labor contribution by the
program participants and/or cash for work
This approach is most applicable in situations
Cash distribution to program participants by the post office in
where there are several design solutions Padang, west Sumatra
required (e.g., urban (re)-construction) and Photo Credit: CRS
the local markets are functioning and will be
Each of these options requires variation in how
able to cope with the increased demand of
construction materials are procured, necessary
construction materials with consideration of
construction supervised and quality monitored.
It is advisable to consider pre-selecting It is essential to tailor the shelter response
vendors or approaching vendors on how the to the specific post-disaster situation and
process will work, especially in regard to cash shelter needs of the affected population .
flow and payment schedule to the vendors in
order for them to have the materials available
(i.e., payment every month or every 2 weeks).
D . Cash distribution to program participants
with labor contribution by the program
participants and/or cash for work
most applicable where there are several design
solutions required and the local markets are
functioning and will be able to cope with the
addition, security situations and logistics allow
for the distribution of cash to the program
The cash-for-work approach is valuable
as a mechanism for supporting disaster-
affected households to rebuild their houses
while also providing cash injections into the
affected local economies. It provides waged
labor opportunities to other laborers in the
mobIlIzAtIon And trAInIng example: padang earthquake, west sumatra,
Community mobilization is one of the most
may be prudent to offer a “solidarity” incentive
essential activities within any form of owner-
bonus for the households. This helps ensure that
driven construction modality. The engagement community members support one another in the
and participation of the program participants, re-building of their communities. In the Padang
earthquake response, 10% of the total cash grant
community leaders and affected communities
was withheld until all households in the cluster
is vital, as they are either building the safely completed the construction of their homes.
structures themselves, procuring the materials
from local markets and/or employing local
craftsmen or labor to build the structures.
Many shelter projects are assessed on their
occupancy rate and not on the completion rate of
the shelters. Consequently the participation of the
CRS team monitors the progress of T-shelter construction in
task 1: Cluster program participants into
task 2: Agree on scope of participation with
task 3: Develop construction training and
Once the target group has been established, it
is advisable to divide the program participants
into smaller neighborhood groups or clusters.
This assists in organizing the construction
Program participant list is posted on wall within the
supervision and monitoring. The clusters community
can inform the program team about “special
needs” within their cluster group, such as
elderly households that require a hand rail to
get in and out of the shelter or a wheel chair
In the case of a voucher or cash process
neighborhood members can take up
At this stage, a clear agreement with the program
is a form showing that the program participants
have agreed to participate in the construction
of their own houses. If they are disabled or do
not have the ability, then they are responsible
for “recruiting” other people to assist. In this
respect, the clustering of neighborhood into
work teams is beneficial to set up a community-
based assistance model. When possible, the Construction training for host and affected communities and
local community should be looking out for the CRS staff of emergency shelter, Niger, 2012
Photo Credit: Seki Hirano for CRS
degree to which this happens is dependent upon
Template of household agreement in Appendix 1
Shelter program participant card in Appendix 3
In addition to the construction brochure/guide Prefabrication yard for T-shelters employed 50% women
(refer to B.6), a construction training and and 50% men. The manager reported that this created a
balanced work environment and that women’s productivity
feedback process should be developed with was equal to others, Haiti earthquake response, 2010
the program participants. This is often done Photo Credit: Benjamin Depp for CRS
during the DEMO construction. This information
should be inclusive of all groups of program
participants, such as women, elderly, etc. the pilot shelter is constructed to teach safe
construction techniques and provide first available
shelter to the most vulnerable. It also provides the
Refer to B.4 for pilot construction as training on
opportunity to improve the design and material
risk: It is possible that the most vulnerable
References on gender in construction contact receive the least well-constructed shelter in these
summAry of outcomes selectIon And purchAse
agree on the scope of their participation
outcome 2: Program participants have access to
There is a formal purchasing process for CRS
to purchase construction materials directly
outcome 3: Clear feedback system is set up and
for in-kind material distribution or CRS direct
agreed upon with community
On the other hand, if program participants
will be purchasing construction materials with
CRS funds themselves on the local markets,
a formal tender process is not required.
However, it is essential that a market survey
for construction materials has been conducted
In general, it is the task of the tender process
to establish material cost and delivery
time clarity for this construction project.
Consequently, it is important that the tender
documents are as clear and detailed as
possible and that the bidder understands the
tender documents to be able to give realistic
Please refer to agency CRS procurement policy and
procedures and EFOM and Baltimore Purchasing
task 1: Compile a tender package for materials/
task 2: Set up consistent tender templates
Task 3: Conduct a tendering selection process for
tAsk 1: compIle A tender pAckAge tAsk 3: conduct A tenderIng
for mAterIAls/supplIes selectIon process for procurIng
The tender package should be consistently mAterIAls/supplIes
applied to all potential bidders and include: It is helpful to conduct an initial “pre-
qualification process” that shortlists potential
• The BoQ with the UCA without the prices for
suppliers that have the capacity (financial/
bidders to complete for submission
• A clear description and specifications of tendering process. This may have been done
the materials/equipment, their quality and already during the market survey.
• Clearly state delivery location, process, Refer to assessments point B.3
These background checks assist in mitigating
time loss or supply problems during later
• Tender condition/procedure and schedule – stages in the project by filtering out suppliers
outlining the specific conditions/procedures who are not suitable or reliable.
to follow for bid submission, submission
dates, selection date Vendor Survey and Pre-Qualification checklist in
• Any performance bond or bank guarantee
tAsk 2: set up consIstent tender
templAtes It is important to consider the specific post-
disaster context. The local markets, the capacity
It is advisable to use standard CRS
of suppliers, their workforce, supply chain and
construction material supply tender templates transportation may be disrupted or even destroyed.
and to keep them as simple as possible in bi- It may be necessary to import a large amount of
the construction materials from abroad. The time
and extra cost implications need to be taken into
consideration during the planning stages.
Tender form template material supply in
Tender supplier profile cover letter in Appendix 6
Tender cover letter in Appendix 7
In some instances, it may be necessary to seek
advice from local host country legal advisor in
regard to laws, tax, customs and other regulations.
Imported plywood from USA
Photo Credit: Jean- Daniel Lafontant for CRS
A . Tender announcement: The technical staff should review the returned
BoQ with the procurement team during the
It is a good practice to use local media
tender return evaluation. This will assure
that the right materials are purchased. The
local suppliers of the planned construction
technical team typically knows if the prices
work and where/when to participate in the
that are being quoted are commensurate with
market rates/in the correct price range for the
information meeting for potential suppliers to
promote openness and transparency
Bid comparison worksheet template in
The pre-qualified suppliers need to be informed
of the tendering schedule and submission
requirements (the completed tender package), It is highly advisable to select multiple vendors
including clarification period, submission date, and not to sole source your procurement
purchases. One practice is to sign smaller
evaluation period and tender announcement date
contracts with multiple vendors, evaluate
to promote openness and emphasize that fair performance and then increase contracts with
competition will be guaranteed between bidders. vendors that deliver high-quality materials on time
• 5-7 days to bidders to answer tender
It is not uncommon to find the returned tender
• 5-7 days to procurement/engineering staff to prices higher than the estimated material price
evaluate received bids and obtain required established during the market survey and design
phase. This can cause a substantial overall cost
increase, especially in cases of a large number
• 5-7 days for final contract negotiation with
alternative material or material specifications (i.e.,
• 7 days to finalize contract and all necessary
D . Sole sourcing – In cases where the
A Bid Selection Committee shall be formed availability of good performing suppliers is
within the Country Program to participate in the limited or security is a concern, and CRS has
bid selection. identified and tested suppliers/contractors
The submitted tender returns need to be
formal bidding process may be appropriate.
Documenting the justification for sole sourcing
must be completed for audit purposes.
Contact shelter advisor for advice and
• compliant with the tender package, as tabled
in task 1 by engineering staff price
should dictate selection . Unless actual costs
have already been determined by the UCA and
market survey, then performance rather than
price becomes a more relevant selection criteria.
• Retention withheld (if required, such as tax
POLICY STATEMENT CRS, Baltimore Purchasing • Performance Bond/Bank Guarantee
program offices Purchasing departments or
designated personnel will purchase all goods and
Past experiences have shown that it is advisable
services on the best terms consistent with the
to avoid advance payments to supplier if possible.
required quality and delivery, and at the lowest
total cost. Acquisition will be without favoritism
obtain maximum value for each dollar spent. All example: kyrgyzstan, 2010
interested suppliers shall receive fair and impartial
Past experience has shown that the receiving
department is not always familiar with the quality
The bid selection committee is formed from standards of construction materials. This is why the
designated CRS Staff (i.e., Administrative, technical team needs to develop a specifications
Finance managers, and senior managers). As checklist for the receiving department or be present
per CRS purchasing policy, the engineering and when material is delivered.
procurement staff are to be excluded from the bid
Construction vendors may well try to sell CRS their
selection committee, but can provided a technical
inferior products because we are not a traditional
the receiving department to REJECT inferior quality
was developed to assist the receiving staff for
mCaRterSia l Mdeliavetrey rwiitah la sQseussainlgi ttyha tC thhe emcaktelriiaslst
Depending on the size and scope of required are to the specified quality.
material/equipment or services, either a Contact shelter advisor for complete material quality
standard purchase order or service contract checklist
purchases require only a purchase order as the
service contract would be needed. This may
include materials delivery in compliance with
Contact shelter advisor for service contract
Extract of material quality checklist developed for
Purchase order should include: winterized T- shelter response
• Tender information (BoQ with UCA, material
• Payment schedule (outlining when progress
outcome 1: Quality supplier selected and
payments should be made after delivery) purchase order awarded
• Suppliers prices, as submitted in the tender outcome 2: Cost and delivery time clarified
• Advanced payment (to be avoided if possible, mance Bonds and Bank Guarantees are issued by a bank or
otherwise kept to minimum) other financial institution and held in escrow pending confir-
mation from the client that contract terms have been met.
kooB b.10 work stAge: tAsk 1: set up regulAr meetIngs
constructIon supervIsIon It is advisable to continue regular community
meetings from the planning stage throughout
develop good working relationships and provide
Sub-stage: refer to B.11 a forum to address issues that may arise
Construction supervision during construction. Specific discussion topics
time/cost and quality • Agreement on the specific responsibilities of
Completion and hand over • Ambiguity regarding roles and expectations;
b.11 sIte supervIsIon help desk, etc.); refer to task 2 below
• Initial construction training and other
In an owner-driven construction project, the technical advice; refer to B.4 for pilot
owner or community is responsible for carrying construction and task 3 point B.8
• Agreement on site safety measures; refer to
CRS is directly responsible for supervising the task 3 below
safety and quality of construction, as well as
• Explanation of the intended project schedule;
training and managing the required labor, in the
form of program participants’ own construction
and skilled/unskilled laborers. • Explanation the site inspection process and
tAsk 2: set up feedbAck system
It is good practice to set up a feedback
task 1: Set up regular meetings
mechanism to ensure that the right people are
task 2: Set up feedback system – Accountability
targeted (display program participant list at
task 3: Set up site safety measures the start of the project) and that grievances or
task 4: Facilitate changes and improvements concerns can be address in a timely fashion.
task 5: Equipment and materials management/
• Setting up telephone hotlines or a help desk
• Posters, leaflets and notice boards
In some cultures it would be most appropriate
to have feedback for men/women separately
Refer to B.4 for pilot construction
example: haiti, 2012 • Consider climate and weather conditions
or specific hazards related to the post-
• Protection from falling; using barriers when
excavating or working at higher levels
• On-site safety – Do they have the proper
Notice boards displaying the complaints and feedback process
Photo Credit: CRS crs internal note:
Catholic Relief Services are fulfilling their legal and
moral obligation to maximize awareness of safety
in the workplace and to minimize the potential for
24-hour hotline service for feedback mechanism posted
within the community, Padang, west Sumatra
tAsk 3: set up sIte sAfety meAsures
It is essential that safety measures protect
Construction site safety in Japan for construction of a training
laborers, building program participants and center in Nasushiobara, 2012
surrounding communities from harm during Photo Credit: Seki hirano for CRS
construction. Construction works are inherently
dangerous activities and can lead to injury or
loss of life if not taken seriously. Consequently,
safety procedures need to be developed and
• Develop site safety training and awareness
campaigns for workforce and communities
• Consider barriers to enclose the
tAsk 4: fAcIlItAte chAnges And tAsk 5: eQuIpment And mAterIAls
Changes, alterations and improvements In the case of CRS directly building or in-
are part of almost all construction projects. kind material distribution, it is necessary
Especially in post-disaster (re)-construction, set up warehousing and stock management
it is essential to be able to respond to procedures to distribute materials and avoid
unforeseen events, market price fluctuations delays that may occur in the supply chain.
and challenges that may arise. These changes To do this, set up a warehouse management
may be initiated by either the community or system with full-time, dedicated warehouse
staff and should be discussed and mutually management staff.
agreed upon before making any changes to
The following steps will be required to provide
adequate controls of and accountability for
may have an impact on cost and safety.
Any corrective action or design change
• Warehousing: Ideally the location of the
identified by the field engineer should
materials and equipment warehouse should
be reported clearly on the construction
be within close proximity of the construction
monitoring form . It is also possible to use
site, be easily accessible and have adequate
change order forms, if an adequate amount
security to reduce the threat of theft.
of monitoring staff is available. After the
changes/corrections have been made, they • Stock management system: Establish
should be re-inspected and approved by the a warehouse management system that
field engineer/community representative prior monitors equipment/material receipt/
to proceeding with additional construction inspection, storage, inventory and dispatch.
activities. This guards against unsafe This would include forms and documents
construction being “covered up” and hidden (i.e., stock cards, good received notices
• Transport and logistics: Establish logistics
Refer to point B.12 for details on documentation to track delivery and dispatch
quality control with CRS-owned or contracted transport (i.e.,
Construction monitoring form in Appendix 10
• Financial accounting: Goods purchased for
constructions should be in compliance with
Refer to B.12 for change order form explanation,
CRS financial accounting practices. This
implies adequate financial tracking of pre-
procedures and contract templates for
protocols to reduce risk of fire, bodily injury
Contact emergency team for advice on setting
If social mobilization is strong and community In Kyrgyzstan, in response to ethnic violence
organizations are functional, warehouse/storage and flooding, transitional winterized shelter were
could be done in the village itself. This minimizes constructed. A dissimilar warehousing approach
cost of transport and chances of damage during was taken by CRS. The construction materials
transportation as well as encourages ownership of for the winterized t-shelter were procured and
the project by the community. warehoused by CRS. Security guards were hired to
monitor the site and warehouse during the day and
This experience was made in the state of West
Bengal as part of the flood-resistant shelter
response. At the very beginning of the project, reflections:
Village Development Committees (VDC) were In some circumstances, it can be beneficial to have
promoted to ensure community participation in all two security companies to do this to reduce risk of
key decisions, but mainly the program participant collusion and theft.
selection process. These committees were also
entrusted the responsibility of safekeeping the
shelter materials, especially the RCC pillars and
bamboo. The decision to store materials locally
was made firstly because the VDC were very active
and engaged, and secondly because the affected
areas were not accessible by road during the rainy
accountable and took ownership of the project.
The vendors were asked to deliver to village
points where program participants collected their
materials. Any damage during transport to the
village points was the responsibility of the vendor.
Consequently, there were no costs incurred for
Winterized t-shelter with insulation layer under construction
Photo Credit: Andrew Schaefer for CRS
The CRS/partner should identify scope of storage/
warehousing during planning stages. This is
particularly important where all-weather roads are
outcome 1: Good communication and feedback
outcome 2: Site safety measures agreed upon
outcome 3: Procedures to control construction
tIme, cost And QuAlIty summAry of tAsks
task 1: Set up a project schedule (progress
Project Controls are the monitoring and
evaluation (M&E) processes, tools and task 2: Set up project cost control (budget
protocols that facilitate the supervision of
construction activities in respect to their safety, task 3: set up quality control (assures
task 4: Set up document control (records
Specific attention should be given to management)
quality control . In general, CRS will need
to manage the workforce, which will be
either skilled laborers or the program tAsk 1: set up A project schedule –
participants themselves, most of whom are A tImelIne
not construction specialists. Community and It lists the work activities and enables
program participants should participate in project managers to monitor construction
the inspection process as well as daily and progress against time. The Monitoring Plan is
weekly reporting to encourage ownership and particularly important to the project schedule
responsibility for the project. as it sets out the most important phases of
construction and key inspection points.
The tools and procedures listed below have
been developed to assist in: Regular reporting from the site inspection
teams is used to update the schedule. The
A. Constantly monitoring the safe and quality
best updated on a weekly base with actual
B . Tracking construction progress and cost
field measurements and observations of the
expenditures, as progress may vary and
construction works completed. This procedure
is important to allow the project managers to
C . Monitoring material inventories and costs foresee problems, such as cost increases,
(if not procured by program participants substandard construction, disagreements, etc.,
D . Pro-actively identifying problems and making
improvements in projects design and budget
note: The project schedule has to be project
expenditures. and emergency specific. It has to factor in many
overlapping issues and also uncertainties, such
These schedules need to be set up to
as actual performance capabilities after disaster,
be project specific using the information availability of craftsmen, training of community,
documented in the technical design phase as site conditions (debris, contamination, landmines)
site planning and requirements
• Market survey for labor and material
Project tracking and reporting
Weekly site inspections are recorded on the example: orissa in India, 2008
project schedule; cost is normally reported
As experiences during the low-cost flood-resistant
monthly by showing the current (Job to Date) shelter project in rural villages in Orissa have
cost of completed work and a current estimate shown, in a case where construction works are
stopped (due to various reasons), the workers tend
of final cost at project completion (Estimate
to leave to outside places in search of work. The
at Complete). A tracking curve diagram can be
non-availability of workforce and high drop-out rate
used to graphically represent the status of the could become a challenge and cause delays in the
Project schedule/project tracking templates: In absence of any formal binding or contract, these
trained workers leave the construction site for
Templates can be developed using scheduling
personal or other reasons, affecting the project
software such as MS Project, Primavera or MS progress. Further, the project loses trained/skilled
Excel that organize information in a Gantt chart workers and must invest time and resources to
train another group, which also hinders progress.
formal contract from the beginning between
Digital project schedule templates available on
No Description Unit qty Unit Price
Unit cost analysis example template itemizes materials, labor
tAsk 2: set up project cost control A . Establish key inspection points . These
Track the progress of the project by keeping mark the completion of key work stages
an updated weekly project cost. Add a tracking where the field engineer assesses the
line into the Bill of Quantities as materials safety and quality of construction before
are used. Use regular weekly reporting from it can continue. Generally, these key
the site inspection teams to assure the BoQ inspection points are:
The Bill of Quantities (BoQ)/Unit Cost
Analysis (UCA) developed in the technical
design stage are the documents needed to • Wall/roof structure junction
track budget expenditures over the life of the
Cash advance for subsequent work should only
Tip: Dividing the cost of completed work to
be released if work has been completed to
date by the overall contract cost is an accurate
and industry standard method of tracking
and reporting overall project progress. Trends B . Daily inspection by site foremen
in actual cost expenditure versus planned In this model, one foreman will supervise a
expenditure can be analyzed to estimate couple cluster of homes (depending on the
budget over/under expenditures. geographic proximity). The site foreman will
oversee site safety, keep the construction
moving forward, report back any problems
answer technical questions and make sure
Budget requests to allocate funds for the purchase C . During weekly inspections by field
of materials or to finance construction should engineer/architect, the social team records
comply with the standard CRS purchasing policy
progress and defects on quality construction
and procedures as well as any specific donor
requirements. The construction project manager monitoring form. Ideally, the field engineer
should track budget expenditures in close should take photos with the date and put them
collaboration with the CRS country program finance
Construction monitoring form in Appendix 10
tAsk 3: set up QuAlIty control
Quality control is an inclusive process that
involves the program participants, the technical
staff and the social staff equally. The pilot
training, feedback system, regular community and social team staff
meetings and change procedures are all part is required to monitor
of ensuring safe and quality construction. and inspect effectively .
In addition, the following inspection procedures
are available, which need to be adapted to suit
the specific emergency context (i.e., available
• Filing of all relevant soft copies of
outcome 1: Project schedule set up
procedures set up and agreed upon
outcome 3: Quality control set up and agreed
upon with program participants
Sub-standard quality construction in a school made from stabilized outcome 4: Filing system set up
tAsk 4: set up document recordIng
This includes recording matrix and filing
system. All documents relevant to the project
should be recorded to reduce risk and
confusion, especially in multiple sites and
various revisions. This facilitates the retrieval
and consolidation of information from regular
progress reports for reporting to project
• Design plans and specifications
• Site inspections, surveys, soil and water
• Land titles or other land ownership/
• Building permits and certifications, other
• Progress report, quality control inspection
• Relevant incoming and outgoing
kooB b.13 completIon And hAnd tAsk 3: hAnd over certIfIcAtes
over Once shelters are complete, it is necessary
to officially hand over shelters to program
participants, inform local officials and report
This includes completing the construction
works and facilitating the safe occupation of
simple form can be used, indicating that
the structure by the program participants.
these materials (in the case where they don’t
have land ownership) belong to the program
future repairs are the responsibility of the
task 1: Conduct final inspection owners” are included in hand over certificates.
task 2: Re-verify the original target program
Attention and advocacy should be given to
shared ownership between husband and wife
task 3: Hand over certificates
tAsk 1: conduct fInAl InspectIon
Once the construction works have been
completed a final inspection of the structure
is necessary to make sure that it is built
according to the intended design and quality
specified, and to verify that it is safe for the
been found during a previous inspection, and it
is important to verify that all previous mistakes
to record all the outstanding mistakes that
Program participants standing in front of their completed transitional
Photo Credit: Seki Hirano for CRS
The final inspection should be documented
in a final inspection report (including the
“mistake list” and accepted by the program
outcome 1: Final inspection completed and
tAsk 2: re-verIfy the orIgInAl tArget
outcome 2: Ownership certificate handed over
It is not uncommon for program participant
conditions to have changed during the
construction period (i.e., moving away, change
it is important to re-verify that the original
target program participants are the occupants
of the completed shelter. Ideally, the regular
community meetings and close supervision
procedures should have noted these changes
and facilitated proper re-allocation of the
kooB b.14 After completIon • Evacuation meeting points, routes and
The time after completion is often • Community-based risk mapping
• Setting up community evacuation drills
actual construction activities have been
completed and the end-users are occupying
the structure. Especially in areas that are
prone to reoccurring hazard events, such as
flooding, earthquake, fire, high winds, etc., it Refer to hazard resistant construction, PASSA
is important that the inhabitants know how to (Participatory Approach for Safe Shelter
take care of their structure to remain safe. Awareness), www.sheltercentre.org/library
summAry of tAsks Giving consideration to DRR is critical during the
site selection, site planning and technical design
task 1: Introduce maintenance activities of the construction.
task 2: Introduce disaster risk reduction
task 3: Evaluation and program participant tAsk 3: evAluAtIon And progrAm
To be in a position to learn from past
tAsk 1: Introduce mAIntenAnce is an important part of the overall project.
ActIvItIes In areas with extreme weather conditions,
Different construction materials require a midterm evaluation is good practice. An
different ways to maintain them in a good essential part of the evaluation is to include
condition. These should be explained to the the program participants in the process
end-user through meetings, maintenance through interviews, questionnaires or other
leaflets, etc. Good maintenance has a feedback systems to evaluate the performance
significant impact on the safety and longevity of the construction project.
• Seasonal maintenance before rainy seasons,
typhoon seasons, etc., such as checking outcome 1: Maintenance procedures agreed upon
for roof leaks, that drainage channels are
not blocked, roof trusses are secured, roof outcome 2: Disaster risk reduction training set up
sheeting has no missing nails, etc. outcome 3: Evaluation conducted
• General maintenance such as checking for
tAsk 2: Introduce dIsAster rIsk
disaster risk reduction (DRR) must be
• Fire safety, especially for highly flammable
kooB b.15 IdentIfy ApproprIAte b.15.1 determInIng the
An important lesson-learned from CRS Staff recruitment should follow Country
construction activities is that project success Program protocols; however, there are a
depends on the qualifications, skills and number of internal and external risks that
experience of the technical and management CRS teams should consider when staffing up
resources engaged to manage the project. a construction program. Staffing plans and
Careful but expeditious vetting of potential management structure should seek to mitigate
candidates is critical in creating highly these risks.
Within the engineering and construction
industry, a four/six year engineering degree Owner-driven and contractor-built projects will
normally represents the foundation on require different organizational structures.
which individuals will build different levels The diagram under B.15.2 gives a generic sample
of experience and skills7, especially in post- for owner-driven construction, which can be
adapted according to the project scale, complexity
disaster situations. Beyond that, the years
of experience and breadth of exposure to
different construction designs of varying
complexity develops the needed qualifications
to manage different types of construction For sample job descriptions, refer to digital
Senior staff will be required to have a balance
of the technical skills and social skills to lead
a program, and the ability to think creatively
about resolving conflict and technical issues
without losing sight of the overall project goals:
rebuilding livelihoods and reducing vulnerability. The structure below offers an example for
owner-driven projects where CRS is responsible
for ensuring the project is carried out by the
program participants themselves. There are
three main functions to this structure, which
is lead by the construction project manager .
There is an engineering team (light grey color),
community mobilization team (light pink color)
and operational support team (dark grey color).
all fulfill important roles in the project.
7 Engineers and architects generally specialize in design,
Engineers often focus on one or more disciplines such as
structural engineering, water and wastewater, geotechnical
dIAgrAm of orgAnIzAtIonAl structure for owner drIven project
Site Foreman Site Foreman
Skilled labor Unskilled labor
Closely monitors day-to-day construction
activities; reports deviations from design and/
The project manager is responsible for
or work plan; identifies corrective action; gives
the overall effective implementation of the
both verbal and written instructions to the
control and program control (cost and time),
reporting; monitors quality and progress
of construction. The field engineer gives
construction training and safety instruction.
This position is the day-to-day liaison with
the site foreman, program participants and
mobilization and support staff), health and
safety issues and document control. Site foreman
This position works closely with the field
Engineering staff: engineer, organizing skilled and unskilled labor,
and needs to be on site with the workforce.
Site foreman is responsible for reporting on
The senior engineer is responsible for
site activities and keeping records (photos/
supervising the field engineers, managing the
engineering team and developing the design,
Monitoring Plan, and works with procurement
team to source materials, equipment, etc. The If CRS is managing the construction activity
senior engineer is responsible for the appropriate directly, contract management, material and
design decisions that have developed equipment supplies, logistics and warehousing
through the design process with the program are the responsibility of the CRS program
participants/community mobilization team/ support department. Adequate staffing and
procurement team and senior management. administrative systems are required to ensure
The senior engineer oversees development of accountability and control over material and
construction manuals/accountability processes equipment assets. Program support staff needs
and encourages good working relationship to communicate frequently and closely with the
between technical and community mobilization technical and community mobilization teams.
The scope of work of this position will depend The procurement officer is responsible for
on the amount and complexity of engineering/ preparation of tender actions (tender packages
design required (i.e., this could be an architect for materials, suppliers, tender evaluations,
or engineer with experience in (re)-construction etc.), purchase orders, and monitoring material
in post-disaster, best with an owner-driven and equipment cost, delivery and quality.
Administration and finance manager
The administration and finance manager
is responsible for preparing contracts, bid
The warehouse manager is responsible
equipment that support construction activities.
The community liaison officer is responsible for
managing relations with recipient communities,
ensuring accurate and timely information
sharing, and ensuring community expectations
are aligned with project objectives. This
position oversees complaints and feedback
processes, helps resolve conflict with the
communities and works closely with the
Community animators are responsible for
maintaining communications with the community
and ensuring information is channeled to the
correct place. They are important contact points
for feedback from the program participants
and ensure that people are targeted with
the appropriate intervention. These staff can
assist in identifying vulnerable pockets of the
community and help tailor specific aspects of the
program for those with spectial needs (elderly,
BOQ FOR VARIOUS CONSTRUCTION WORKS
Note: The Items listed below shall correspond to the Items recorded in the Measurement Sheet (BOQ), where the quantities of
Items executed by the Contractor are recorded, checked and approved by the Supervisor.
Prior to preparing the Price Offer on the BoQ, the Contractor shall make reference to the Technical Specifications & Drawings
LOT 1: METAL AND MANSORY WORKS
1 CONSTRUCTION OF GENERATOR PLATFORM & SHED GUEST HOUSE
Item Description Unit Quantity Total SDG
poring plain concrete 1:2:4 to fix the columns
1.2 the second side,columns support are made from steel RHS PC 8
on the columns. And as per drawings
1.4 on the rafters. And also as horizontal bracing for supporting LM 54
around the room perimeter with 60x30x3 mm RHS.
Provide and fix for roof for generator, from corrugated metal
all other necessary accessories as per manufacturer's
Supply and fix expanada metal for Wall of the generator,
RHS 60x30x3 mm rate will be as the above purline item rate,
this rate only for expanada metal.
Supply and fix steel door size 2.2x1.2m double leaf, made of
steel RHS exernal frame 80x40x3 mm and internal frame
60x30x3 mm, heavy metal sheet 2mm thickness and all other
necessary accessories as per manufacturer's specifications.
Provide and build 1 (one) brick wall 200 mm thickness c/s
mortar around the guard booth. wall height 0.7 m above NGL
and 0.2 m under NGL, as per specifications & drawings and
20 mm thick cement sand 1:8 mix finished semi rough for
external walls & smooth internally, in the generator shed walls
Supply,level and compact minimum 600mm approved quarry
material as back fill in preparation for the ground slab
Provide & Cast Plain concrete 1:2:4 Grade 20, at Floor
1.12 with 1:2:4 cement mix and floated with cement. Also rate to SM 24
in guard booth floor, as directed by the engineer.
generator shed curbing walls, and color as directed by site
Item Description Unit Quantity Rate SDG Amount SDG
Mild steel grills fabricated from MS measuring 60x30x3mm
frames with high tensile steel mesh of 16mm diameter bars
spaced at 150mm centre to centre. The work includes
applying anti-rust paint and three coats of oil based paint
as per the drawing ELF-2020-006. The cost shall include
supply fabrication and installation
1200X2100 permanently fixed with stainless mosquito mesh two
layers at the office extension
1200X2100 permanently fixed with stainless mosquito mesh two
1400x2100 with frame and hinges opened as per the drawing
1400x2100 permanently fixed with stainless mosquito mesh,
two layers at the office extension
1200x2100 with frame and hinges to be opened as per drawing
500x500 permanently fixed for bathroom vents with two layer
stainless mosquito mesh for office extension
Repair the main entrance door grill by introducing a new frame
60x30x3mm and relocate the three locking mechanism PC 4
Backfill with existing brick debris outside the office block and
pour plain concrete as a ramp for the entrance gate with a
serated finish for vehicle approach and extend existing pvc
3 CAR PARKING SHADE-GUEST HOUSE
Item Description Unit Quantity Rate SDG
Excavation of 600x600x1000mm deep holes to receive steel
3.2 Mass concrete class 25 to anchor columns to the ground CM 3
Mild steel Circuler Hollow section, CHS, 75mm Dimater, 3mm
Mild steel Rectangular Hollow Section, 80x40x3mm for
Mild steel Rectangular Hollow Section,60x30x3mm for Purlins
Mild steel Rectangular Hollow Section,40x40x3mm for Ties and
0.35mm Thick Galvanised Corrugated Iron sheets fixed on the
roof frame with J-bolts and rubber washers
3.8 Applying two coats of antirust paint to all metal surfaces ITEM 1
3.9 Applying three coats of oil based paint to all metal surfaces ITEM 1
LOT II - MINOR METAL REPAIRS, PAINTING AND ELECTRIC
4 RENOVATION OF SECURITY BOOTH - GUESTHOUSE
Item Description Unit Quantity Rate SDG
Supply and install Flush mounting single socket outlet of 16A
4.1 1Phase for the two police posts the rate including all necessary PC 4
Relocate and install the two window air conditioner from the roof
4.2 rooms to the police posts the rate includes power switch with PC 2
sockets and other fittings
Repair existing armed police booth by sealing leaking roof and
4.3 repair of floor boards, replacement of broken window glass and ITEM 1
connect to the nearby power source
Repair the un-armed security guard booth by increasing the
4.4 container height to 2.1meter and add two windows measuring ITEM 1
600x600mm windows covered with fibre glass
Clear bushes inside and out side the compound as directed on
supply and fix form material to fill all the gaps at the iron sheets
for the pedestrain unarmed guards booth
Apply three coats oil based paint on both interior and exterior of
the existing guard booth
Fabricate grills to fill the gap on top of the perimeter gates for
4.8 the guesthouse. The grill will be 200mm wide covering the entire PC 3
Item Description Unit Quantity Rate SDG Amount SDG
All metal surfaces MUST be painted with antirust and two
coats of oil based paint. This includes iron sheet walls
poring plain concrete 1:2:4 to fix the columns
5.2 the second side,columns support are made from steel RHS PC 5
on the columns. And as per drawings
5.4 on the rafters. And also as horizontal bracing for supporting LM 45
around the room perimeter with 60x30x3 mm RHS.
all other necessary accessories as per manufacturer's
Supply and fix steel door size 2.2x1.2m double leaf, made of
steel RHS exernal frame 80x40x3 mm and internal frame
60x30x3 mm, heavy metal sheet 2mm thickness and all other
necessary accessories as per manufacturer's specifications.
Supply and fix steel door size 1x1m single leaf, made of steel
RHS exernal frame 60x40x3 mm and internal frame 60x30x3
necessary accessories as per manufacturer's specifications.
Provide and build 1 (one) brick wall 200 mm thickness c/s
0.2 m under NGL, as per specifications & drawings and
20 mm thick cement sand 1:8 mix finished semi rough for
external walls & smooth internally, in the generator shed walls
Provide & Cast Plain concrete 1:2:4 Grade 20, at Floor
5.11 with 1:2:4 cement mix and floated with cement. Also rate to SM 9
in guard booth floor, as directed by the engineer.
generator shed curbing walls, and color as directed by site
Item Description Unit Quantity Rate SDG
2x1 meter prefabricated toilet booth from mild steel frame of
60x30x3mm with GCI iron sheet cover for both walls and roof on
a concrete foundation with brick masonry foundation walling.
Theboothwillbeinstalled withan approvedWC connected to
the toilet pit inside the warehouse. The booth will have metal
5.13 fabricated door with mortice locks. The works include ITEM 1
connection to the fresh water line and installation of a wash
handbasin outside the toilet to be located next to the police
booth. All metal surfaces will be painted with antirust and two
coats of oil based paint. Install vent connected to the power
Supply,level and compact minimum 300mm approved quarry
material as back fill in preparation for the gorund slab
Deliver, level and compact at optimum moisture approved
facilitate access of trucks and vehicles
with three coats of oil based paint to Engineer's approval
Electrical for the booth and toilet
2"pvc pipefor laying ofcables from thepowerlinealonngthe
fence to the security booth
3 core, 6sqmm cable for connecting thesecurity booth to the
main power distribution along the fence
4 way Distribution box for police booth connected to the main
5.21 Ceiling fan comlete with control switch PC 1
5.22 Two way one gang switch PC 2
5.24 Ceiling rose light fitting PC 2
Window AC complete with sockets and installation cables
Item Description Unit Quantity Rate SDG
Provide for scaffolding, safety belts and all other scaling
equipment required for safe working on a four story
6.1 molds, cracks, and any other unwanted materials. Use white SM 710
cement sealant where applicable
Apply three coats of weather guard exterior paint to the
Apply oil based paint on all metal surfaces as directed by
7 ELECTRICAL WORKS-GUESTHOUSE AND OFFICE
Item Description Unit Quantity Rate SDG
Flourescent lighting fittings: 2x40W, 240v, 50Hz, IP20 four feet
7.1 with double parabolic high purity aluminium louver and
electronic ballast, as Phillips OR equivalent for Guesthouse PC 10
7.2 Ditto: 2 feet for Rooms for Guesthouse PC 23
Two way one gang switch, 10A,240V,MK UK or equally
One way one gang switch, 10A, 240V, MK Uk or equally
Socket outlets, 13 A, 240V with indicator lamp and switch, 3 pin
7.6 Duplex socket outlet, 13A,250V with indicator lamp and switch,
3 pin rectuangular for Guesthouse and Office extension PC 130
Alarm control panel 1 loop complete with power cable for Guest
Alarm bell installation, testing and commisioning of switch
7.8 outlets, wiring, boxes and all other accessories required,
specified and approved by engineer for Guest house ITEM 1
7.9 distribution board for security light at the guest house and one
for the Office extension ITEM 2
Installation, testing and commisioning of standby generator
cable cleats, , earthing as approved ITEM 1
250w outdoor high pressure sodium street lights IP65 Die
casting Aluminum for HPS Lamps ITEM 20
GI Pipes 2 inch diameter, 5 meter long with clips including
7.13 welding two 500mm long GI pipe lamp holdersand concrete lugs
for the perimeter lighting. Provide for excavation and concrete
works of 500mm deep for the foundation of the pole ITEM 28
6mmsq three core cable for installation of security lights, 90m
LOT IV- MASONRY ELECTRICAL AND PLUMBING WORKS
8 POLICE POST IN DALIL BABIKER, NORTH DARFUR
Item Description Unit Quantity Rate SDG
Mobilization, Establishing contractor's camps, supply equipment
8.1 ,personnel, Lab, accommodation and constructionplant on the L.S 1
Demobilization, removal of site establishments of the
8.2 contractor's organization, camps and reinstating the site to the L.S 1
to includes disposal of excavation to away or selected area/use.
Supply and build stone strip foundation under the wall 0.5 m
width x 0.8 m depth, with filling by sand by layers, watered well.
be approved by the Engineer before using.
Provide & Cast Reinforced Concrete 1:2:4 Grade 25 on the
per drawings. Rates to include for form work and curing for 7
item, Note: the detailing of rebar is 3 in the top and 3 in the
8.7 and compaction with as specified for the floor in the room by m3 76.8
allowing 10 cm thick for plain concrete, as per drawings &
8.8 cement sand mortar 1:8, For all walls as per specifications, m2 191.0
drawings and directions of the Engineer.
Rates to include for form work and curing for 7 days min, as
which will have zinc roof as per specifications, drawings and
2 walls which will have RCC Slab roof as per specifications,
drawings and directions of the Engineer.
Provide & Cast Reinforced Concrete 1:2:4 roof beam/ slab
beam (30x20cm) for the 2 Cells, 2 Stores, as per drawings.
Rates to include for form work and curing for 7 days min., as
8.11 be 15cm spacing both side, as per drawings. Rates toinclude m3 7.3
for form work and curing for 7 days min., as directed by the
Item Description Unit Quantity Rate SDG
Supplyandfixreinforcement bars 12mm or other diam, allas
8.13 per the drawing. Price shall include supply, cutting, bending, ton 1.8
placing and tying bars all as per the structural drawings.
thick min. Rate to include for surface rendering with 1:3:6
8.14 cement mix and floated with cement. Also rate to include for M2 110.0
form work, workmanship and curing for 7 days minimum. in
on the wall by height 3.3 m from Grade Beam, @ 2 m c/c
Supply and fix the purlins RHS 60X30X1 mm, with antirust,
all other necessary accessories as per manufacturer's
Provide and fix suspended ceiling from gypsum board square
tiles 60x 60 cm, and Aluminium frames T profile, and the
suspended hanging system, including aluminum L profile. The
tiles shall be approved by the Engineer prior to supplying on site
drawings and directions of the Engineer.
Supply, provide & apply Internal roofs, walls & external walls,
Plastering 20 mm thick cement sand 1:8 mix finished semi
of approved brand, manufacture andcolor oninternal walls as
directed by site Engineer. The price is inclusive of applying
of approved brand,manufacture andcolor oninternal roofs as
directed by site Engineer. The price is inclusive of applying
external emulsion paint of approved brand and manufacture,
and color as directed by site engineer. For external walls and
supply instal lighting and ventilation opens size 60 x 30 cm,
mild steel bars, sixbanda and namly for mosquitonet
120x120 cm with frames and transparent fiberglass. The work
8.21 includes protection bars, sxbanda andmosquito steelscreens/ no 4
nemly 2 layers and all accessories. the sample shall be
Supply, Install and paint ribbed heavy duty steel door of size
8.22 220x120 cm with frames And steel sheet 2mm thick and no 1
accessories including lock (turkish lock). For For Hall entrance.
Item Description Unit Quantity Rate SDG
Supply, Install and paint ribbed heavy duty steel door of size
16 mm @ 10 cm c/c and accessories including lock (turkish
Provide and lay light weight plain concrete (khafga) 10 cm
average thickness on the new roofs of 2 Cells and 2 Stores,
TOTAL FOR BILL 1, POLICE POST
Ceiling mounted sweep fan Vortices NORDIK DESIGN 1S
Position Speed Control, Infrared remote-control unit, non-
be 230cm. Price shall include PVC insulated conductors of
3x2.5mm2 inside PVC conduit of 16mm diameter including
junction boxes with covers and insulating screw cap connectors.
8.21 Flush mounting Single socket outlet of 16A 1Phase. no 6
Supply and fix 105W energy saving lamp with wiring of
8.24 2x2.5mm2 cable inside PVC conduit of 16mm diameter to be no 2
fixed at outside the police post
TOTAL FOR BILL 2, ELECTRICAL
Excavate to the required depth for pit. The work includes
slab beam. Depth I m or directed by the Engineer
& 20 cm depth with 5 bars 12 mm .Rates to include for form
8.28 work and curing for 7 days min, as directed by the engineer. M3 0.98
Supply and cast reinforceed concrete slab (1:2:4), for the 3
latrines, thickness 15 cm, the mesh of ø 12 mm should be 15
8.29 cm spacing both side, as per drawings. Rates to include for M3 1.45
form work and curing for 7 days min., as directed by the
Supply and build brick for external walls of Latrine in and the
Supply and build brick for the internal walls of Latrine and
Supply and lay plaster of cement mortar (1:6) for internal and
Supply and paint 3 coats of an approved type and color
8.33 emulsion paint for internal and external use of walls and m2 85.76
Item Description Unit Quantity Rate SDG
Supply and fix a rectangular hollow section RHS steel pipe
all necessary plates, bolts, welding and accessories.
Supply and fix a pre painted corrugated steel sheets 0.35mm
washer and all necessary accessories.
8.37 size 200x80 cm with frames And rabbid steel sheet and no 3.00
accessories including lock. for D4 size 200x80 cm for 3 latrines
supply instal liting and ventilation opens size 40 x 30 cm,
8.38 fabricated from steel rectanguler pipes RHS 6x3 cm, sixbanda nos 3.00
and namly for mosquitonet
TOTAL FOR BILL 3, LATRINES
8.39 on 1000mm elevated masonry support (brick wall plinth) as job 1.00
shown on the drawing and site plan. Exact location to be
TOTAL FOR BILL 4, WATER TANK
BILL 5, Chain-link Fence Construction
Excavation and pouring concrete 1:2:4 for fence support posts
2mm thickness and height not less than 2.0 m above ground
and 30 cm under NGL, fixed in plain concrete (1:3:6) footing
the fence posts and gates.
SupplyandfixTwo painted12mm steelbars tobe provided at
top and bottom of fence according to drawings
steel box section 80x40x3mm and internal frames of steelbox
8.45 vertically and horizontally each 20 cm C/C. Gate supports are pcs 1.00
from steel pips 4'' fixed on plain concrete footing (0.40m x
0.40m x 0.50m). All steel sections must be painted with red-
oxide paint and 2 coats of approved oil paint
A fabricated mild steel visbilitry board measuring 2meter by
and logo design to be as directed by engineer
PO Box 3527 I Halfway House 1685 I Building 27 I Suite G6 I Thornhill Offi ce Park I Bekker Road I Midrand 1686 BUILDING WORK FOR AFRICA 2015
Copyright © Africa Association of Quantity Surveyors ISBN: 978-0-86886-839-4
In August 2013 a working group comprising of Prof H M Siglé (chairman), Ms E Edwardes and Mr R de Villiers was appointed to prepare a Standard Method of Measuring Building Work
for Africa inter alia taking into account the standard methods in use in Africa, being East Africa (Kenya, Tanzania and Uganda), Mauri(cid:415) us, Nigeria, South Africa and Zambia, but also
taking into account interna(cid:415) onal tendencies. The Associa(cid:415) on of South African Quan(cid:415) ty Surveyors (ASAQS) agreed to fund this working group and to allow their Standard System of
Measuring Building Work 1991 to be used as a base document
The Standard Method of Measurement for Africa commi(cid:425) ee of the Africa Associa(cid:415) on of Quan(cid:415) ty Surveyors (AAQS), namely Messrs D N Kimoro (Kenya), M K Frimpong (Ghana),
G Ndung’u (Zambia) and N Mooroogan (Mauri(cid:415) us) were given the opportunity to provide input, fi rstly on the tabulated format and therea(cid:332) er on the proposed new standard method
Concurrently the ASAQS agreed to make available its Model Bills of Quan(cid:415) (cid:415) es (abbreviated descrip(cid:415) ons) as the base document for an updated version for use in conjunc(cid:415) on with the
Standard Method of Measuring Building Work for Africa. A working group comprising of Prof H M Siglé, Mr R de Villiers and Prof C H Klopper, funded by the AAQS, was appointed to
undertake the task of upda(cid:415) ng the model bills
The AAQS Services and Model Documenta(cid:415) on board sees the publica(cid:415) on of the abovemen(cid:415) oned two documents as a major step in standardising procurement documenta(cid:415) on in Africa
and improving the quality of such documenta(cid:415) on
DISCLAIMER: While the Africa Associa(cid:415) on of Quan(cid:415) ty Surveyors (AAQS) aims to ensure that its publica(cid:415) ons represent best prac(cid:415) ce, the Africa Associa(cid:415) on of Quan(cid:415) ty Surveyors (AAQS) does not accept or assume any liability or responsibility
for any events or consequences which derive from the use of the Standard System of Measuring Building Work for Africa 2015. This publica(cid:415) on is provided “as is” without warranty of any kind, either expressed or implied including but without
limita(cid:415) on to warran(cid:415) es of merchantability, fi tness for a par(cid:415) cular purpose and non-infringement
STANDARD METHOD OF MEASURING BUILDING WORK FOR AFRICA 2015 – FIRST EDITION
NOTE 1 11 New work chiefl y inside exis(cid:415) ng building(s) 9
4 Order of items 3 1 Method and procedure 10
6 Net measurements 3 SITE CLEARANCE 10
9 Provisional sums 4 4 Nature of material to be excavated 11
10 Con(cid:415) ngencies etc 4 5 Classifi ca(cid:415) on of material to be excavated 11
DEMOLITIONS 6 9 Risk of collapse of excava(cid:415) ons 13
1 Method and procedure 6 10 Working space 13
2 General 6 11 Keeping excava(cid:415) ons free of water 13
2 Materials arising from altera(cid:415) ons 7 15 Compac(cid:415) on of surfaces 14
3 Barricades, screens, etc 7 16 Gabions and interlocking block retaining structures 15
8 Re-use of exis(cid:415) ng components 9 LATERAL SUPPORT 16
STANDARD METHOD OF MEASURING BUILDING WORK FOR AFRICA 2015 – FIRST EDITION
1 Removal of lateral support 16 PREFABRICATED PILING 21
2 Insurance 16 9 Precast concrete piles 21
3 Movement monitoring 16 10 Steel piles 21
GROUND ANCHORING 16 CONCRETE CAST IN SITU PILING 22
5 Establishment 16 13 Driven, bored or similar tube piles 23
6 Test anchors 17 14 Disposal of excavated material 23
8 Waterproofi ng of ground anchors 17 CONCRETE, FORMWORK AND REINFORCEMENT 24
9 Tes(cid:415) ng, re-tensioning and de-stressing of ground anchors 17 CONCRETE 24
10 Rock bolts and rock dowels 18 1 Classifi ca(cid:415) on etc 24
PLANKING, STRUTTING AND SHORING 18 3 Hollow blocks, spacing (cid:415) les and prefabricated beams 24
13 Shoring units 19 5 Prescribed curing compounds 25
LATERAL SUPPORT PILING 19 6 Surface treatment 25
14 Lateral support piling 19 7 Grooves, channels, mor(cid:415) ces, etc 25
8 Bedding under base plates etc 25
1 Site condi(cid:415) ons 20 10 Formwork to components 26
2 Nature of the work 20 11 Addi(cid:415) onal requirements for formwork to walls 27
3 Establishment 20 12 Addi(cid:415) onal requirements for formwork to columns 27
4 Se(cid:427) ng up 20 13 Addi(cid:415) onal requirements for formwork to slabs, beams and stairs 28
5 Reinforcement 20 14 Edges, risers, ends and reveals 29
STANDARD METHOD OF MEASURING BUILDING WORK FOR AFRICA 2015 – FIRST EDITION
18 General 30 13 Splayed mortar fi llets in cavi(cid:415) es 36
20 Pre-tensioned or post-tensioned reinforcement 31 15 Projec(cid:415) ons and cores 36
PRECAST CONCRETE 32 18 Joint forming material in movement joints 37
2 Wall linings 32 20 Fabricated lintels 37
3 Slab paving 33 21 Turning pieces 37
6 Joint sealants, join(cid:415) ng strips, etc 33 23 Face brickwork 38
7 Holes, notches, etc 33 24 Walls faced both sides 38
25 Cut face brick linings 38
MASONRY 34 26 Fair cu(cid:427) ng to face brickwork 38
MASONRY WORK 34 27 Special face bricks at angles 39
2 Concrete fi lling 34 29 Face brick copings, lintels, sills, etc 39
BRICKWORK 34 30 Face brick arches 39
3 Mass brickwork and piers 34 31 Face brick niches 40
4 Regular shaped piers 34 BLOCKWORK 40
5 Walls and linings 35 32 General 40
6 Beamfi lling 35 33 Piers and pilasters 40
7 Vaul(cid:415) ng 35 34 Special blocks for copings, sills, lintels, etc 40
8 Brick lintels 35 PAVING ETC 41
9 Forming toothings and bonding 36 35 Paving 41
10 Hacking face or raking out joints of exis(cid:415) ng brickwork for key 36 NATURAL STONEWORK 41
11 Building brickwork to a fair face 36 RUBBLE WALLING 41
STANDARD METHOD OF MEASURING BUILDING WORK FOR AFRICA 2015 – FIRST EDITION
36 Mass and irregular rubble work 41 63 Special features 45
39 Facing and poin(cid:415) ng 42 DAMP PROOF COURSE 46
42 Trimming to receive plaster etc 42 2 Classifi ca(cid:415) on 46
43 Flues 42 SHEET OR MEMBRANE WATERPROOFING 46
44 Niches 42 3 Sheet or membrane waterproofi ng 46
45 Turning pieces and centres 42 4 Protec(cid:415) on 47
STONEWORK OF SLATE, MARBLE, GRANITE, ETC 43 5 Flashing strips 47
47 Ashlar walling, linings and paving 43 6 Trowelled-on waterproofi ng 47
50 Columns, piers, etc 44 8 Membrane reinforced liquid waterproofi ng 48
51 Special features 44 WATERSTOPS, SEALING STRIPS, JOINT SEALANTS, ETC 48
52 Rough rebates, grooves, etc 44 9 Waterstops, sealing strips, etc 48
53 Fair edges, angles, etc 44 10 Joint sealants 48
56 Turning pieces and centres 44 ROOF COVERINGS, CLADDINGS, ETC 49
MISCELLANEOUS 45 SLATES, TILES AND SHINGLES 49
59 Ornamental blocks, glass blocks, etc 45 3 Eaves and verges 49
60 Hoop iron (cid:415) es, cramps, etc 45 4 Ridges, hips, closed valleys and ver(cid:415) cal angles 49
STANDARD METHOD OF MEASURING BUILDING WORK FOR AFRICA 2015 – FIRST EDITION
7 General 50 5 Plate nailed (cid:415) mber roof truss construc(cid:415) on 56
8 Ridges and apex caps 50 6 Roof boarding 57
9 Ornamental bands and runners 50 7 Eaves and verges 57
PROFILED SHEETING OF METAL, FIBRE(cid:883)CEMENT, PLASTIC, ETC 51 8 Floors 57
13 Cranks, bullnoses and curved turn-ups 51 10 Frames etc 58
14 Rolled edges at verges 51 SUNDRY JOINERY 58
FLAT SHEET METAL 53 PROCESSED MATERIALS 60
21 End caps, fi nials, etc 53 CEILINGS, PARTITIONS AND ACCESS FLOORING 61
SHEET METAL FLASHINGS, LININGS, COPINGS, ETC 54 CEILINGS 61
CARPENTRY AND JOINERY 55 3 Access fl ooring 63
1 Classifi ca(cid:415) on etc 55 FLOOR COVERINGS, WALL LININGS , ETC 64
2 Labours 55 1 Coverings and linings 64
STRUCTURAL TIMBERWORK ETC 56 3 Margins, borders and turn-ups 64
STANDARD METHOD OF MEASURING BUILDING WORK FOR AFRICA 2015 – FIRST EDITION
4 Insets 64 7 Ribbed fl oors and permanent decking 72
5 Edge and cover strips 64 8 Floors etc formed of open grillework or gra(cid:415) ngs 72
10 Polish, sealers, etc 65 STEEL DOOR FRAMES, DOORS, WINDOWS, ETC 73
2 Components 66 14 Fly screens and burglar screens 73
3 Metal shelving 66 15 Adjustable louvres 74
4 Proprietary kitchen cupboards, lockers, wri(cid:415) ng boards, seats, etc 66 16 Miscellaneous 74
METALWORK 70 2 Plaster and other in situ fi nishes 76
3 Sundry steelwork 70 7 Ornaments etc 77
4 Stairs, balustrading, cat ladders, grilles, gates, framework, etc 71 8 Dividing strips, edge trims, etc 77
5 Minor work 71 9 Metal lathing 77
6 Fixing accessories to structural (cid:415) mberwork 72
STANDARD METHOD OF MEASURING BUILDING WORK FOR AFRICA 2015 – FIRST EDITION
1 Classifi ca(cid:415) on etc 78 FIRE HOSE REELS AND FIRE FIGHTING EQUIPMENT 85
2 Beds and backings 78 16 Fire hose reels etc 85
5 Mitred corners and special edge and corner (cid:415) les 79 18 Sleeves 85
8 Soap dishes etc 79 GENERAL 85
PLUMBING AND DRAINAGE 80 ELECTRICAL WORK 86
1 Roof gu(cid:425) ers, rainwater pipes, etc 80 2 Connec(cid:415) on to main supply 86
PIPEWORK ETC 80 3 Main supply and equipment 86
4 Pipe trenches (method B) 82 6 Cable trenches (method A) 87
7 Anchor blocks, thrust blocks, etc 83 9 Outlet boxes, cover plates, etc 88
8 Gulleys, grease traps, etc 83 10 Cable trunking etc 89
9 Inspec(cid:415) on chambers, catch pits, etc 83 11 Draw wires 89
10 Soakage pits, french drains, etc 84 12 Conductors 89
SANITARY FITTINGS, TANKS, GEYSERS, ETC 84 14 Socket outlets and light switches 89
STANDARD METHOD OF MEASURING BUILDING WORK FOR AFRICA 2015 – FIRST EDITION
18 Holes 90 16 Building management systems etc 99
ELECTRONIC INSTALLATIONS 90 17 Material handling installa(cid:415) ons, disposal installa(cid:415) ons, etc 99
19 Communica(cid:415) on, security and control installa(cid:415) ons 90 GENERAL 99
22 Replacement parts etc 91 21 Replacement parts etc 99
22 Electrical work and work by other trades 99
HEATING, VENTILATION AND AIR CONDITIONING INSTALLATIONS, ETC 92 GLAZING 100
PIPEWORK ETC 92 3 Labours on glass 100
4 Valves etc 94 5 Glass tops, shelves, doors, mirrors, etc 101
5 Pipe trenches (method A) 94 6 Bent glass 101
6 Pipe trenches (method B) 94 7 Leaded and coppered lights 101
8 Encasing 95 9 Materials resembling glass 101
CONVEYING INSTALLATIONS 97 5 Frames etc 103
15 Hoist, escalator and conveyor installa(cid:415) ons 98 7 Signwri(cid:415) ng and gilding 103
OTHER MECHANICAL INSTALLATIONS 99 8 Polishing 103
STANDARD METHOD OF MEASURING BUILDING WORK FOR AFRICA 2015 – FIRST EDITION
PAPERHANGING 104 21 Compac(cid:415) on of natural or excavated ground surfaces 107
1 Classifi ca(cid:415) on 104 22 Road and parking surfacing 107
2 Paperhanging 104 23 Channels, humps and shoulders 108
4 Hessian, canvas, etc 104 25 Road signs, crash barriers, etc 108
EXTERNAL WORK 105 27 Road markings 108
1 Contouring etc 105 28 Stormwater channels 108
2 Topsoil, compost, lime and fer(cid:415) lizer 105 FENCING 109
4 Mulch 105 30 Concrete bases and kerbs 109
5 Grassing, ground cover, etc 105 WASHING LINES 109
7 Pruning of exis(cid:415) ng trees and shrubs 106 PAINTING 110
STANDARD METHOD OF MEASURING BUILDING WORK FOR AFRICA 2015 – FIRST EDITION
This standard system has been compiled in a tabulated format to suit the current method of se(cid:427) ng out documents of this kind
The following is to be noted: Where items are grouped together in the “Item or work to be measured” column those items shall not be grouped together but shall each be given
separately in the unit as shown in the “Unit” column, eg “Concrete, Formwork and Reinforcement” clause 2, concrete in “Surface blindings, surface beds, surface beds cast in
panels, foo(cid:415) ngs, bases, underpinning, slabs inclusive of beams and inverted beams, isolated beams, lintels, stairs inclusive of landings and beams, walls, columns, hollow block
slabs, coff ered slabs, troughed slabs, etc” shall each be given separately in m3
Where items may be grouped together it is specifi cally stated, eg “Concrete, Formwork and Reinforcement” clause 14, formwork to “Edges, risers, ends and reveals exceeding
300mm high or wide” shall be given together in m2
This standard system has been drawn up to provide a uniform basis for measuring building work. It is the result of nego(cid:415) a(cid:415) ons between the various par(cid:415) es and embodies the
Bills of quan(cid:415) (cid:415) es shall refl ect the work to be done as shown on the drawings or contained in the specifi ca(cid:415) on in accordance with the rules laid down in this standard system. No
departure shall be made from this standard system except where no specifi c rule can be applied or where excep(cid:415) onal circumstances involving work of a diff erent character or
par(cid:415) cular circumstances of execu(cid:415) on require the provision of more detailed informa(cid:415) on in order to defi ne the nature and extent of the work. In such cases separate items shall be
given following the general principles contained herein and descrip(cid:415) ons of such items shall provide all the informa(cid:415) on necessary for pricing
Descrip(cid:415) ons in bills of quan(cid:415) (cid:415) es shall be comprehensive and clear. Unless otherwise stated the radii of circular, fl owing and spherical work need not be stated
Unless otherwise stated the descrip(cid:415) on of each item shall be deemed to include manufacturing, conveying and delivering, unloading, storing, unpacking, hois(cid:415) ng, se(cid:427) ng, fi (cid:427) ng
and fi xing in posi(cid:415) on, cu(cid:427) ng, waste, pa(cid:425) erns, templates, plant, temporary works, return of packings, establishment charges, profi t and other obliga(cid:415) ons arising out of the
Unless prescribed the method of execu(cid:415) on of the work shall be at the discre(cid:415) on of the contractor
STANDARD METHOD OF MEASURING BUILDING WORK FOR AFRICA 2015 – FIRST EDITION PAGE 1
The bills of quan(cid:415) (cid:415) es shall be set out in the following format:
Units used in the “Unit” column: ha hectare
STANDARD METHOD OF MEASURING BUILDING WORK FOR AFRICA 2015 – FIRST EDITION PAGE 2
The work shall be set out as far as possible in accordance with the following rules:
4.1 The work shall be divided into trades and sec(cid:415) ons of trades in the order as set out in this standard system. If necessary the work may be further divided into addi(cid:415) onal
sub-sec(cid:415) ons to facilitate cost analyses, cost repor(cid:415) ng, etc
4.2 Ancillary work applicable to a specifi c trade shall be given in that trade in accordance with the principles laid down in the relevant trades
4.3 Within each trade or sec(cid:415) on thereof the order shall be mass, volume, area, length and number
4.4 Subject to the above rules, items shall be arranged in their approximate order of value, the cheapest fi rst
Dimensions shall as far as possible be given in the following sequence:
5.1 Horizontal at right angles to the line of sight
5.2 Horizontal parallel to the line of sight
Unless otherwise stated all work shall be measured net as fi xed in posi(cid:415) on. All wants shall be deducted and no allowance shall be made for waste, nor for passings and laps except
where otherwise stated. Where laps occur they shall be included in the descrip(cid:415) ons
Each measurement shall be taken to the nearest 10mm ie 5mm and over shall be regarded as 10mm and less than 5mm shall be disregarded. This rule shall not apply to any
dimensions stated in the descrip(cid:415) ons
STANDARD METHOD OF MEASURING BUILDING WORK FOR AFRICA 2015 – FIRST EDITION PAGE 3
Quan(cid:415) (cid:415) es shall be rounded off to the nearest whole unit. However, where the value of frac(cid:415) onal quan(cid:415) (cid:415) es is of rela(cid:415) ve signifi cance, quan(cid:415) (cid:415) es may be given to two decimal
Where the quan(cid:415) ty of any work cannot be accurately determined during prepara(cid:415) on of the bills of quan(cid:415) (cid:415) es such work shall be described as provisional and subsequently
Separate provisional sums shall be given for each class of work
Items shall be given for profi t and for a(cid:425) endance where required. Descrip(cid:415) ons of a(cid:425) endance shall include scaff olding and other facili(cid:415) es to be specially provided, prescribed
Amounts required for con(cid:415) ngencies, provision for contract price adjustments and other expenditure which cannot be determined during the prepara(cid:415) on of the bills shall be given
in the summary at the end of the bills of quan(cid:415) (cid:415) es
STANDARD METHOD OF MEASURING BUILDING WORK FOR AFRICA 2015 – FIRST EDITION PAGE 4
Informa(cid:415) on and such requirements and restric(cid:415) ons of a general nature that may aff ect the cost of the works shall be given as items in this sec(cid:415) on such as:
1 Informa(cid:415) on concerning the bills of quan(cid:415) (cid:415) es and the availability of construc(cid:415) on documenta(cid:415) on
2 Names, addresses, telephone numbers, etc of the employer and consultants
3 Par(cid:415) culars of the contract documents
4 Clause headings of the relevant condi(cid:415) ons of contract
5 Requirements with regard to insurances and securi(cid:415) es
7 Broad scope of the works sta(cid:415) ng inter alia overall size, height above and below ground level and number of storeys and the approximate area and height of any internal area
with a fl oor to ceiling height in excess of 5m
8 Restric(cid:415) ons with regard to access, area to be occupied and procedure
9 Restric(cid:415) ons on the use or disposal of materials and ar(cid:415) cles found on the site
10 Responsibility for the preserva(cid:415) on of boundary beacons etc
12 Delegated authority to agents and others to perform du(cid:415) es for specifi c aspects of the works
13 Responsibility in respect of previous contracts
14 Responsibility in respect of the management and execu(cid:415) on of the works
15 Responsibility and requirements for health and safety specifi ca(cid:415) on
16 Programming of the works and mee(cid:415) ngs
17 Samples of materials and workmanship, shop drawings and manufacturer’s instruc(cid:415) ons
18 Enclosure of the works and protec(cid:415) on of the public
19 Plant and temporary works such as roads, sheds, offi ces, toilets and no(cid:415) ce boards
20 Temporary services such as water, electricity, ligh(cid:415) ng, informa(cid:415) on and communica(cid:415) on systems, etc
21 Method of payment for preliminaries
22 Method of calcula(cid:415) on for the adjustment of preliminaries
STANDARD METHOD OF MEASURING BUILDING WORK FOR AFRICA 2015 – FIRST EDITION PAGE 5
Item or work to be measured Unit Measurement rules Descrip(cid:415) ons shall be deemed Explanatory notes
1 Restric(cid:415) ons regarding blas(cid:415) ng and the use of jack
hammers, hydraulic breakers and shears, wrecking
1 Breaking up and removing surface concrete etc m2
2 Breaking up and removing kerbing and the like m
3 Breaking down and removing fences, boundary walls, etc m 2 General descrip(cid:415) ons shall be given
4 Demoli(cid:415) on and removal of buildings and other structures No 3 General descrip(cid:415) ons shall be given
4 Materials or components which are to remain the
property of the employer shall be so described including
storage, transport as necessary and handing over
5 Removal of founda(cid:415) ons 5 Shall be dealt with in accordance with clause 5 of
6 Disposal of materials 6 Disposal of materials shall be described and where
materials are to become the property of the contractor
provision shall be made for allowing credit
STANDARD METHOD OF MEASURING BUILDING WORK FOR AFRICA 2015 – FIRST EDITION PAGE 6
Item or work to be measured Unit Measurement rules Descrip(cid:415) ons shall be deemed Explanatory notes
1 Restric(cid:415) ons regarding the use of jack hammers etc shall 1 Junc(cid:415) ons of new with exis(cid:415) ng
2 Making good shall be included in the descrip(cid:415) ons of 2 Stru(cid:427) ng, shoring, etc
the relevant altera(cid:415) on items where expedient, incidental to altera(cid:415) ons
otherwise it shall be given separately in accordance with
the principles laid down in the relevant trades
3 Prescribed stru(cid:427) ng and shoring shall be given in
accordance with the principles laid down in “Lateral
2 Materials arising from altera(cid:415) ons
4 The manner of disposal of materials shall be stated and 3 Temporary storage of
where materials are to become the property of the materials or components
contractor provision shall be made for allowing credit required to be set aside for
5 Where materials are permi(cid:425) ed to be re-used in new refi xing
work this shall be stated
6 Materials or components which are to remain the
property of the employer shall be so described including
storage, transport as necessary and handing over
7 Materials or components required to be set aside for
1 Prescribed temporary barricades, screens, roofs, etc m or 8 Alterna(cid:415) vely prescribed temporary barricades, screens,
No roofs, etc may be given in detail in accordance with the
principles laid down in the relevant trades
2 Removal of walls, slabs and surface beds m2
3 Removal of concrete beams, columns and stairs No
STANDARD METHOD OF MEASURING BUILDING WORK FOR AFRICA 2015 – FIRST EDITION PAGE 7
Item or work to be measured Unit Measurement rules Descrip(cid:415) ons shall be deemed Explanatory notes
4 Removal of fi nishes from walls, fl oors, ceilings, etc m2
5 Removal of roofs No 9 Descrip(cid:415) ons shall include ceilings, eaves, etc
6 Removal of suspended fl oors, panelling, ceilings, etc m2 10 Descrip(cid:415) ons shall include bearers, ba(cid:425) ens, brandering,
7 Removal of par(cid:415) (cid:415) ons m 11 Descrip(cid:415) ons shall include doors, ironmongery, glass, etc
8 Removal of doors, windows, fi (cid:427) ngs, etc No 12 Descrip(cid:415) ons shall include frames, ironmongery, glass,
13 Doors, windows, etc to be removed from walls to be
demolished shall be given separately
9 Removal of sanitary fi (cid:427) ngs, tanks, geysers, etc No 14 Descrip(cid:415) ons shall include disconnec(cid:415) on from pipes,
11 Alterna(cid:415) ves 15 Alterna(cid:415) vely items required to be given in cubic,
square or linear metres may be given in number and
descrip(cid:415) ons may include making good and any
12 Altera(cid:415) on work No 16 Shall be given in inclusive items embodying more than
17 Alterna(cid:415) vely altera(cid:415) on work may be given in detail in
accordance with the principles laid down in the relevant
13 Cu(cid:427) ng or altering openings in structures No 18 Descrip(cid:415) ons shall include lintels, arches and making
good to jambs and fi nishes all round
STANDARD METHOD OF MEASURING BUILDING WORK FOR AFRICA 2015 – FIRST EDITION PAGE 8
Item or work to be measured Unit Measurement rules Descrip(cid:415) ons shall be deemed Explanatory notes
14 Building up openings No 19 Descrip(cid:415) ons shall include bonding new to exis(cid:415) ng work,
15 Re-use of exis(cid:415) ng components No 20 Alterna(cid:415) vely re-use of exis(cid:415) ng components may be
given in the units as provided for in the relevant trades
16 Work in patches 21 Work in patches, not included in the foregoing, shall be
17 Hacking face or raking out joints of exis(cid:415) ng masonry for
18 Wedging up new walling to the underside of exis(cid:415) ng 22 Shall be measured only when required for the support
19 Making good to ends of walls m
20 Making good to faces of walls where cross walls are
21 Cu(cid:427) ng through fl oors or ceilings for the passage of new 23 Descrip(cid:415) ons shall include making good to fl oors and
walls etc m ceilings where expedient
22 Cu(cid:427) ng through fl oors or ceilings for the passage of new
11 New work chiefl y inside exis(cid:415) ng building(s)
23 New work chiefl y inside exis(cid:415) ng building(s) 24 Shall be given in accordance with the principles laid
down in the relevant trades
STANDARD METHOD OF MEASURING BUILDING WORK FOR AFRICA 2015 – FIRST EDITION PAGE 9
NOTE: External work of minor extent may be given in “Earthworks” in accordance with the principles laid down in “External Work” where applicable
Item or work to be measured Unit Measurement rules Descrip(cid:415) ons shall be deemed Explanatory notes
1 Restric(cid:415) ons regarding blas(cid:415) ng and the use of jack
2 Excava(cid:415) on or fi lling which is to be done in a par(cid:415) cular
order or in sec(cid:415) ons, such as may be prescribed for the
removal of lateral support to adjoining premises or for
fi lling behind retaining walls, shall be so described
3 Prescribed mul(cid:415) ple handling of material shall be
4 No allowance shall be made in measurements of
disposal and car(cid:415) ng away of material for bulking
1 Digging up and removal of rubbish, debris, vegeta(cid:415) on, 5 Where the value is of rela(cid:415) ve signifi cance, the removal
hedges, shrubs and trees not exceeding 200mm girth, of hedges etc shall be given separately in metres or in
2 Removal of larger trees and tree stumps exceeding 1m 6 The girth around the trunk 1m high above ground level
high No shall be stated, grouped in sizes exceeding 200mm and
not exceeding 500mm girth and therea(cid:332) er in stages of
7 Descrip(cid:415) ons shall state whether roots are to be
grubbed up and holes fi lled in, sta(cid:415) ng the method
STANDARD METHOD OF MEASURING BUILDING WORK FOR AFRICA 2015 – FIRST EDITION PAGE 10
Item or work to be measured Unit Measurement rules Descrip(cid:415) ons shall be deemed Explanatory notes
3 Removal of tree stumps not exceeding 1m high No 8 The girth around the top of the stump shall be stated,
grouped in sizes as in measurement rule 6 above
9 Descrip(cid:415) ons shall state whether roots are to be
grubbed up and holes fi lled in, sta(cid:415) ng the method
10 The nature of the material to be excavated shall be
described and if not known shall be assumed
11 Excava(cid:415) ons shall be described to be in the type of
material that is the least diffi cult to excavate
12 Excava(cid:415) ons in material of a more diffi cult character
shall be suitably classifi ed and given as extra over,
separa(cid:415) ng only “bulk” and “trenches and holes” and
13 Breaking up and removing concrete, brickwork, etc
encountered in excava(cid:415) ons shall be similarly given
STANDARD METHOD OF MEASURING BUILDING WORK FOR AFRICA 2015 – FIRST EDITION PAGE 11
Item or work to be measured Unit Measurement rules Descrip(cid:415) ons shall be deemed Explanatory notes
14 The quan(cid:415) (cid:415) es of excava(cid:415) ons shall be the net voids to 1 Se(cid:427) ng aside excavated
be formed in accordance with the drawings and material within 100m from
specifi ca(cid:415) ons and shall be not less than the horizontal the perimeter of the
area of the bo(cid:425) om of the relevant structures excava(cid:415) ons for use as fi lling,
mul(cid:415) plied by the average depth from the surface forming excavated surfaces
16 Where undercu(cid:427) ng is prescribed the undercut work trimming sides and stepping,
shall be kept separate, allowance for overbreak being levelling and ramming
made at an angle of 45 degrees bo(cid:425) oms
4 Bulk excava(cid:415) ons, excava(cid:415) ons for trenches and 17 Separated into successive depths of 2m related to the
excava(cid:415) ons for holes m3 original or reduced ground level as the case may be
5 Open face excava(cid:415) on such as cu(cid:427) ng or levelling of 18 No dis(cid:415) nc(cid:415) on being made for depths
6 Digging up topsoil to be preserved m2 3 Se(cid:427) ng aside within 100m
from the perimeter of the
7 Diversion of services including cu(cid:427) ng, stopping off , etc 19 Shall be given in the relevant trades
8 Excavated material to be carted from the site m3 20 Shall be given as extra over all excava(cid:415) ons and, if to
be dumped in a prescribed place, the loca(cid:415) on and
approximate distance shall be stated
STANDARD METHOD OF MEASURING BUILDING WORK FOR AFRICA 2015 – FIRST EDITION PAGE 12
Item or work to be measured Unit Measurement rules Descrip(cid:415) ons shall be deemed Explanatory notes
9 Risk of collapse of excava(cid:415) ons m2 21 Shall be measured to all sides of excava(cid:415) ons whether
working space is given or not
22 The area for sloping sides shall be the mean length
mul(cid:415) plied by the perpendicular height
23 Separate items shall be given for “bulk” and “trenches
and holes” as well as for excava(cid:415) ons from ground level
to not exceeding 1,5m deep and from ground level to
24 Risk of collapse shall not be measured where prescribed
support is to be measured or where the excavated face
is prescribed to be cut back to the angle of repose
10 Sides of excava(cid:415) ons necessarily required to be excavated 25 Descrip(cid:415) ons shall include any consequent backfi lling
back for working space ie beyond the extent defi ned sta(cid:415) ng the method and/or degree of compac(cid:415) on
under clause 6 “Excava(cid:415) ons” m2 26 Shall be grouped in successive overall depths of not
exceeding 500mm, exceeding 500mm and not exceeding
case the nature of the requirements and the distance
between the structure and the side to be excavated back
27 Back excava(cid:415) ons occurring in material of a more diffi cult
character shall be given in square metres as extra over
for each item of back excava(cid:415) on
11 Keeping excava(cid:415) ons free of water
11 Keeping excava(cid:415) ons free of all water other than
12 Removal of seepage water and water from other 28 Items such as the provision of pumps of a specifi c
subterranean sources in excava(cid:415) ons capacity, necessary pipework and a provisional number
of pumping hours shall be given
STANDARD METHOD OF MEASURING BUILDING WORK FOR AFRICA 2015 – FIRST EDITION PAGE 13
Item or work to be measured Unit Measurement rules Descrip(cid:415) ons shall be deemed Explanatory notes
13 Filling of soil, stone, broken brick, etc for backfi lling 29 Shall be measured to the volume a(cid:332) er compac(cid:415) on, 4 Haulage not exceeding
to trenches, holes, etc, for fi lling over site, for fi lling sta(cid:415) ng the method and/or degree of compac(cid:415) on 100m from the perimeter
in landscape mounds, berms, etc and for fi lling under 30 Separate items shall be given for fi lling obtained from of the excava(cid:415) ons where
fl oors, steps, paving, etc m3 the excava(cid:415) ons or from specifi ed borrow pits or fi lling is obtained from the
supplied by the contractor excava(cid:415) ons
31 The approximate distance of haulage shall be stated 5 Forming to falls, slopes,
if fi lling obtained from the excava(cid:415) ons is hauled more contours, etc
than 100m from the perimeter of the excava(cid:415) ons
14 Topsoil m3 32 Measurement rules 30 and 31 above apply
15 Subbase and base courses m3 33 Shall be given in accordance with clause 13 “Filling”
16 Stabilisa(cid:415) on of layer works with lime, cement, etc m3 34 Shall be given as extra over sta(cid:415) ng the rate of applica(cid:415) on
17 Compac(cid:415) on of natural or excavated ground surfaces m2 35 Shall be measured only when the method (other than
ramming bo(cid:425) oms referred to under clause 6
STANDARD METHOD OF MEASURING BUILDING WORK FOR AFRICA 2015 – FIRST EDITION PAGE 14
Item or work to be measured Unit Measurement rules Descrip(cid:415) ons shall be deemed Explanatory notes
16 Gabions and interlocking block retaining structures
18 Retaining structures formed of fi lled gabion boxes and 36 Shall be grouped in successive stages of 5m total heights
ma(cid:425) resses m3 37 The sizes of the boxes and ma(cid:425) resses and the
diaphragm spacings shall be stated
19 Retaining structures formed of interlocking blocks m2 38 The area of sloping structures shall be the mean length
mul(cid:415) plied by the perpendicular height
39 Descrip(cid:415) ons shall state the rate of slope and shall
include fi lling of blocks with garden soil, concrete, etc
20 Trench excava(cid:415) ons, open face excava(cid:415) ons, fi lling behind 40 Shall be given separately in accordance with the
retaining structures, fi lter fabric, ground anchors, principles laid down in the relevant trades
22 Trea(cid:415) ng surfaces with weedkillers, insec(cid:415) cides, etc m2 41 Forming V-grooves along founda(cid:415) on walls etc and
trea(cid:415) ng with insec(cid:415) cides shall be included in the
23 Tests to determine the degree of compac(cid:415) on or other
STANDARD METHOD OF MEASURING BUILDING WORK FOR AFRICA 2015 – FIRST EDITION PAGE 15
Item or work to be measured Unit Measurement rules Descrip(cid:415) ons shall be deemed Explanatory notes
1 Precau(cid:415) ons to be taken and procedures to be followed
when removing lateral support shall be given only if
2 In all other cases risk of collapse shall be given in
accordance with the principles laid down in
1 Insurance against claims arising from the removal of 3 Shall be allowed for, either by provisional sum or by
lateral support Item sta(cid:415) ng the limit of the insurance cover required
2 Establishing of bench marks, pegs, etc for prescribed
3 Periodic movement surveys No 4 Descrip(cid:415) ons shall include the scope of the surveys
5 The nature of the work and the excavated faces to be 1 Drilling
supported, any limita(cid:415) ons aff ec(cid:415) ng the ground
anchoring, the strata through which the anchors will
have to pass and the posi(cid:415) on of any cables, pipes or
other services shall be described
4 Establishment of plant etc on the site Item
5 Subsequent establishments for tes(cid:415) ng, re-tensioning
STANDARD METHOD OF MEASURING BUILDING WORK FOR AFRICA 2015 – FIRST EDITION PAGE 16
Item or work to be measured Unit Measurement rules Descrip(cid:415) ons shall be deemed Explanatory notes
6 Test anchors No 6 Descrip(cid:415) ons shall include the working load, lower
anchorages, upper anchorages, thrust blocks and the
7 Classifi ca(cid:415) on 7 Ground anchors shall be given under headings sta(cid:415) ng 2 Ini(cid:415) al tensioning, ini(cid:415) al
the working load acceptability tes(cid:415) ng and
8 Lower anchorages No 8 Dis(cid:415) nc(cid:415) on shall be made between rock anchors and
9 Upper anchorages No 9 Descrip(cid:415) ons shall include prescribed protec(cid:415) on
11 Tes(cid:415) ng and re-tes(cid:415) ng of cable holes for fi ssures and
12 Cement grou(cid:415) ng of cable holes to prevent ingress of
13 Re-drilling holes, washing out of grout and encasing of
9 Tes(cid:415) ng, re-tensioning and de-stressing of ground anchors
re-tensioning and de-stressing of ground anchors No
STANDARD METHOD OF MEASURING BUILDING WORK FOR AFRICA 2015 – FIRST EDITION PAGE 17
Item or work to be measured Unit Measurement rules Descrip(cid:415) ons shall be deemed Explanatory notes
10 Rock bolts and rock dowels
15 Rock bolts, expanding rock bolts, rock dowels and soil 10 Descrip(cid:415) ons shall include nuts, washers, thrust plates 3 Drilling
16 Soldiers, boarding, shotcre(cid:415) ng, fabric reinforcement, 11 Shall be given in appropriate items in accordance with
etc clause 12 “Planking and stru(cid:427) ng” or the principles
laid down in the relevant trades
17 Concrete or mortar packing behind soldiers m 12 The minimum thickness shall be stated 4 Formwork
19 Planking and stru(cid:427) ng 13 Planking and stru(cid:427) ng required to be le(cid:332) in shall be 5 Wedges, nails, screws, etc
20 Timber planking, precast concrete planking and metal
22 Gum poles, logs and the like m 14 The minimum diameter shall be stated
23 Tubular and solid sec(cid:415) on steel stru(cid:427) ng t 15 Descrip(cid:415) ons shall include bol(cid:415) ng and welding
24 Bolts and clamps t 16 Alterna(cid:415) vely bolts and clamps may be included with the
STANDARD METHOD OF MEASURING BUILDING WORK FOR AFRICA 2015 – FIRST EDITION PAGE 18
Item or work to be measured Unit Measurement rules Descrip(cid:415) ons shall be deemed Explanatory notes
25 Shoring units No 17 Descrip(cid:415) ons shall include sole pieces, wall plates, etc
18 The cubic metre content per unit if in (cid:415) mber and the
tonnage per unit if in steel shall be stated
27 Timber cross bracing between shoring units m3
28 Steel cross bracing between shoring units t
29 Lateral support piling 19 Shall be given in accordance with the principles laid
STANDARD METHOD OF MEASURING BUILDING WORK FOR AFRICA 2015 – FIRST EDITION PAGE 19
Item or work to be measured Unit Measurement rules Descrip(cid:415) ons shall be deemed Explanatory notes
1 The nature of the site with regard to contours, water
tables, high and low water levels, strata through which
piles will have to pass, etc shall be described
2 The nature of the work, any limita(cid:415) ons on the methods 1 Staging, tubing, framing, rigs,
to be used and special condi(cid:415) ons such as piles sunk je(cid:427) ng, etc
from basement level and from any level other than
ground level shall be described
3 Trial piles, raking piles and piles in contact with one
another shall be given separately
1 Establishment of plant etc on the site Item
2 Subsequent establishments of plant etc for tes(cid:415) ng Item
3 Se(cid:427) ng up plant at each pile posi(cid:415) on, other than sheet 2 Se(cid:427) ng up plant for sheet
4 Reinforcement 4 Shall be given in accordance with the principles laid
5 Exposing piles for inspec(cid:415) on No 5 Descrip(cid:415) ons shall include excava(cid:415) on and backfi lling 3 Risk of collapse of excava(cid:415) ons
and keeping excava(cid:415) ons free
STANDARD METHOD OF MEASURING BUILDING WORK FOR AFRICA 2015 – FIRST EDITION PAGE 20
Item or work to be measured Unit Measurement rules Descrip(cid:415) ons shall be deemed Explanatory notes
8 Stripping back heads of concrete piles to expose
10 Precast concrete piles m 6 Measured for the designed length of pile before being 4 Moulds, joints, protec(cid:415) on
7 Reinforcement may be included in the descrip(cid:415) ons or pitching
12 Driving m 8 Separated into groups not exceeding 10m deep and
13 Dollying piles below ground level No 9 Shall be grouped in successive stages of 1,5m total
14 Concrete in situ in lengthening of piles m3
15 Formwork to concrete in situ lengthening of piles m
16 Steel piles 10 Shall be given in accordance with the principles laid 5 Joints, protec(cid:415) on caps, rings,
down in clause 9 “Precast concrete piles” handling and pitching
STANDARD METHOD OF MEASURING BUILDING WORK FOR AFRICA 2015 – FIRST EDITION PAGE 21
Item or work to be measured Unit Measurement rules Descrip(cid:415) ons shall be deemed Explanatory notes
17 Sheet piling m2 11 Measured for the designed height of piling before being
driven and along the length to be retained
12 Descrip(cid:415) ons shall include shoes, laps and locking
13 Sheet piling required to be le(cid:332) in shall be given
18 Driving m2 14 Measured for the driven depth and along the length to 6 Handling, pitching, protec(cid:415) on
19 Corner piles, junc(cid:415) on piles and other special piles m 15 Shall be given as extra over sheet piling
CONCRETE CAST IN SITU PILING
20 Drilling m 16 Separated into groups not exceeding 10m deep and 7 Risk of collapse of excava(cid:415) ons
therea(cid:332) er in successive depths of 5m and keeping excava(cid:415) ons free
21 Under-reaming for enlarged feet No 17 Shall be given as extra over drilling
22 Work in material of a more diffi cult character m3 18 Shall be suitably classifi ed and given as extra over drill-
23 Prescribed casing to prevent collapse of excava(cid:415) ons or
24 Concrete m 19 Measured through enlarged feet
25 Addi(cid:415) onal concrete in enlarged feet No
26 Formwork to concrete above ground level m
STANDARD METHOD OF MEASURING BUILDING WORK FOR AFRICA 2015 – FIRST EDITION PAGE 22
Item or work to be measured Unit Measurement rules Descrip(cid:415) ons shall be deemed Explanatory notes
13 Driven, bored or similar tube piles
27 Driving or boring m 20 Measured for the depth to which tubes are sunk and 8 Risk of collapse of excava(cid:415) ons
separated into groups not exceeding 10m deep and and keeping excava(cid:415) ons free
28 Concrete m 21 Measured from the top of the concrete to the depth to
which tubes are sunk
29 Expanded concrete bulbs at the bo(cid:425) om of piles No
30 Disposal of excavated material 22 Shall be given in accordance with the principles laid
STANDARD METHOD OF MEASURING BUILDING WORK FOR AFRICA 2015 – FIRST EDITION PAGE 23
Item or work to be measured Unit Measurement rules Descrip(cid:415) ons shall be deemed Explanatory notes
1 Classifi ed according to compressive strength or mix
2 Descrip(cid:415) ons shall not include formwork or reinforce-
ment unless otherwise stated
1 Surface blindings, surface beds, surface beds cast in 3 Components cast against excavated surfaces shall be 1 Filling to irregulari(cid:415) es where
panels, foo(cid:415) ngs, bases, underpinning, slabs inclusive given separately cast against excavated
of beams and inverted beams, isolated beams, lintels, 4 Components to be post-tensioned shall be given surfaces
stairs inclusive of landings and beams, walls, columns, separately 2 Formwork in forming panels
hollow block slabs, coff ered slabs, troughed slabs, etc m3 5 Components cast in sliding/climbing formwork shall be in surface beds
given separately 3 Shaped tops
6 No deduc(cid:415) ons shall be made for voids not exceeding 4 Striking off and curing
7 No deduc(cid:415) ons shall be made for longitudinal pipes not
cornices and kerbs shall be included with the relevant
2 Gradings m2 5 Working to falls and currents
3 Hollow blocks, spacing (cid:415) les and prefabricated beams
3 Hollow blocks No 6 Closed ends
4 Spacing (cid:415) les to soffi ts of solid sec(cid:415) ons m2
5 Spacing (cid:415) les to soffi ts of ribs m
6 Prefabricated beams m 9 Classifi ed in lengths not exceeding 5m and therea(cid:332) er
10 Reinforcement shall be included in the descrip(cid:415) ons
11 Alterna(cid:415) vely the working load shall be stated
STANDARD METHOD OF MEASURING BUILDING WORK FOR AFRICA 2015 – FIRST EDITION PAGE 24
CONCRETE, FORMWORK AND REINFORCEMENT con(cid:415) nued
Item or work to be measured Unit Measurement rules Descrip(cid:415) ons shall be deemed Explanatory notes
7 Shotcrete m2 12 Descrip(cid:415) ons may include formwork where expedient
9 Prescribed curing compounds m2 13 No dis(cid:415) nc(cid:415) on shall be made for diff erent concrete com- 1 Curing treatment
ponents of the fi nished face
10 Surface treatment such as wood fl oat, steel trowel, 2 Surface treatment
power fl oat, evenly ribbed non-slip surface, of the fi nished face
11 Grooves, channels and the like in tops of concrete m 7 Angles, ends, etc
8 Bedding under base plates etc
13 Non-shrink mortar or similar grou(cid:415) ng under base plates 8 Formwork, chamfered edges,
STANDARD METHOD OF MEASURING BUILDING WORK FOR AFRICA 2015 – FIRST EDITION PAGE 25
CONCRETE, FORMWORK AND REINFORCEMENT con(cid:415) nued
Item or work to be measured Unit Measurement rules Descrip(cid:415) ons shall be deemed Explanatory notes
15 Walls, columns, beams, isolated beams, wall beams, 14 Formwork shall be measured to net surfaces of 9 Intersec(cid:415) ons, holes for rods,
slabs, hoods, stairs, shell construc(cid:415) on, etc m2 concrete to be supported, unless otherwise stated bolts, pipes and the like,
15 Formwork to components to be post-tensioned shall be propping, maintaining and
16 Sliding/climbing formwork shall be given separately 10 Formwork required to support
17 Formwork to walls, columns and beams cast against concrete at non-prescribed
excavated or exis(cid:415) ng surfaces shall be given separately temporary breaks
18 Formwork to sides of inverted components shall be
19 Formwork to sloping components shall be given
20 Formwork to circular, spherical and fl owing components
shall be given separately, dis(cid:415) nc(cid:415) on being made for
work exceeding and not exceeding 1m radius
21 No deduc(cid:415) ons shall be made for openings not
22 No deduc(cid:415) ons shall be made for intersec(cid:415) ons of ends
23 No deduc(cid:415) ons shall be made for intersec(cid:415) ons of tops of
columns with slabs, beams, column caps, etc
24 Formwork to render a prescribed fi nish to the concrete
shall be given separately for the diff erent components
25 Alterna(cid:415) vely formwork to render a prescribed fi nish to
the concrete surfaces may be given as extra over rough
formwork for the diff erent components
26 Formwork required to be le(cid:332) in and permanent
formwork shall be given separately
STANDARD METHOD OF MEASURING BUILDING WORK FOR AFRICA 2015 – FIRST EDITION PAGE 26
CONCRETE, FORMWORK AND REINFORCEMENT con(cid:415) nued
Item or work to be measured Unit Measurement rules Descrip(cid:415) ons shall be deemed Explanatory notes
11 Addi(cid:415) onal requirements for formwork to walls
16 Walls other than inner face of sha(cid:332) walls, outer face of 27 Shall be separated into groups for walls not exceeding
walls fl ush with the perimeter of the concrete structure 3,5m in height above bearing level and therea(cid:332) er for
and sliding/climbing formwork m2 total heights above bearing level in successive stages
28 Stair walls stepped over treads and risers of stairs shall
17 Inner face of sha(cid:332) walls m2 29 Size of sha(cid:332) on plan shall be stated in the descrip(cid:415) on
30 Total wall heights shall be stated in successive stages
18 Outer face of walls fl ush with the perimeter of the 31 Total wall heights shall be stated in successive stages of
19 Sliding/climbing formwork to sha(cid:332) walls m2 32 Size of sha(cid:332) on plan shall be stated in the descrip(cid:415) on
33 Total wall heights shall be stated in successive stages
34 No deduc(cid:415) on shall be made for openings
12 Addi(cid:415) onal requirements for formwork to columns
20 Columns other than circular and partly circular 35 Formwork to columns of diff erent shapes shall be given
36 Formwork to columns shall be separated into groups for
columns not exceeding 3,5m in height above bearing
level and therea(cid:332) er for total heights above bearing level
37 Formwork to columns projec(cid:415) ng beyond the perime-
ter of the concrete structure shall be given separately
21 Circular and partly circular columns No 38 Descrip(cid:415) ons may include caps and bases
39 Formwork to circular and partly circular columns
projec(cid:415) ng beyond the perimeter of the concrete
structure shall be given separately sta(cid:415) ng the projec(cid:415) on
22 Column caps and bases No
STANDARD METHOD OF MEASURING BUILDING WORK FOR AFRICA 2015 – FIRST EDITION PAGE 27
CONCRETE, FORMWORK AND REINFORCEMENT con(cid:415) nued
Item or work to be measured Unit Measurement rules Descrip(cid:415) ons shall be deemed Explanatory notes
13 Addi(cid:415) onal requirements for formwork to slabs, beams and stairs
23 Soffi ts of solid slabs and hoods, sides and soffi ts of 40 Formwork to soffi ts of solid slabs and hoods
beams and isolated beams and soffi ts of stairs and exceeding 250mm thick shall be given separately in
landings m2 stages of 250mm. No cognisance shall be taken of the
addi(cid:415) onal thickness caused by inverted beams
41 Formwork to soffi ts shall be separated into groups
propped to a height not exceeding 1,5m, exceeding
1,5m and not exceeding 3,5m and therea(cid:332) er in stages
42 Formwork to soffi ts of sloping components shall be
43 No separa(cid:415) on of height shall be made for formwork to
soffi ts of stairs and landings
44 Formwork propped off sloping or stepped surfaces shall
45 Formwork to sides and soffi ts of isolated beams
propped off isolated beams below, shall be given
24 Soffi ts of composite hollow block slabs m2 46 Measurement rules 41, 42 and 44 above apply
47 Shall be measured over the fl ush surfaces of adjacent
25 Soffi ts of coff ered slabs m2 48 Measurement rules 41, 42 and 44 above apply
49 Shall be measured to the full extent of the coff ered
area, the widths and centres of the ribs being stated
27 Soffi ts of adjacent fl ush surfaces of coff ered slabs m2 50 Measurement rules 40, 41, 42 and 44 above apply
28 Soffi ts of troughed slabs m2 51 Measurement rules 41, 42 and 44 above apply
52 Shall be measured to the full extent of the troughed
area, the widths and centres of the ribs being stated
STANDARD METHOD OF MEASURING BUILDING WORK FOR AFRICA 2015 – FIRST EDITION PAGE 28
CONCRETE, FORMWORK AND REINFORCEMENT con(cid:415) nued
Item or work to be measured Unit Measurement rules Descrip(cid:415) ons shall be deemed Explanatory notes
13 Addi(cid:415) onal requirements for formwork to slabs, beams and stairs (con(cid:415) nued)
30 Soffi ts of adjacent fl ush surfaces of troughed slabs m2 53 Measurement rules 40, 41, 42 and 44 above apply
31 Troughs of composite prefabricated beam and trough 12 Closed ends
32 Bearers suppor(cid:415) ng prefabricated beams of composite 54 Shall be separated into groups propped to heights not
prefabricated beam and trough slabs m exceeding 3,5m and therea(cid:332) er in stages of 1,5m
33 Soffi ts of adjacent fl ush surfaces of composite prefabri- 55 Measurement rules 40, 41, 42 and 44 above apply
cated beam and trough slabs m2
34 Edges, risers, ends and reveals exceeding 300mm high 56 Shall be given together in one item 3 Includes edges of
or wide m2 57 Edges to concrete to be post-tensioned shall be given openings where
35 Edges, risers, ends and reveals not exceeding 300mm
58 Reveals of openings in sliding/climbing formwork shall 2m girth
36 Projec(cid:415) ons, chamfers, splayed edges, grooves, rebates, 59 Dis(cid:415) nc(cid:415) on shall be made for the posi(cid:415) ons of 13 Stops, angles, etc
etc m projec(cid:415) ons, chamfers, etc rela(cid:415) ve to the component
60 The formwork to the general surfaces shall be meas-
ured past the projec(cid:415) ons, grooves, etc as if they do not
37 Raised panels, pedestals, sinkings, etc No 61 Where applicable the formwork to the general surfaces
shall be measured past the raised panels, pedestals, etc
38 Openings not exceeding 2m girth No 62 Shall be grouped in stages of 1m girth
STANDARD METHOD OF MEASURING BUILDING WORK FOR AFRICA 2015 – FIRST EDITION PAGE 29
CONCRETE, FORMWORK AND REINFORCEMENT con(cid:415) nued
Item or work to be measured Unit Measurement rules Descrip(cid:415) ons shall be deemed Explanatory notes
39 Movement joints and prescribed construc(cid:415) on joints 63 Descrip(cid:415) ons shall include joint forming material 14 Formwork
40 Movement joints and prescribed construc(cid:415) on joints not
exceeding 300mm high or wide, rebated movement
joints and joggle construc(cid:415) on joints m
64 Reinforcement shall be classifi ed according to quality 15 Bending, hooked ends and
65 No separa(cid:415) on of reinforcement shall be made for binding wire, cover blocks and
diff erent concrete components spacers in accordance with
66 Indented or other deformed reinforcement shall be the relevant SABS codes of
given separately prac(cid:415) ce and maintaining in
67 Curved reinforcement and helical reinforcement shall posi(cid:415) on during concre(cid:415) ng
69 Reinforcement to be galvanised or otherwise treated
70 Reinforcement shall be measured to the designed
71 Calcula(cid:415) on of masses shall be based on the values
shown in the relevant Structural Steel Tables issued by
the South African Ins(cid:415) tute of Steel Construc(cid:415) on
72 No allowance in the mass shall be made for rolling
41 Bar reinforcement t 73 Diff erent diameters shall be given separately
74 Bars in lengths exceeding 13m and not exceeding 18m
shall be given separately and therea(cid:332) er in stages of 1m
75 Stools manufactured from round bar shall be included
in the mass of the reinforcement
STANDARD METHOD OF MEASURING BUILDING WORK FOR AFRICA 2015 – FIRST EDITION PAGE 30
CONCRETE, FORMWORK AND REINFORCEMENT con(cid:415) nued
Item or work to be measured Unit Measurement rules Descrip(cid:415) ons shall be deemed Explanatory notes
43 Mechanical splices and couplers No 16 Prepara(cid:415) on of bars
44 Rails, angles and other rolled steel sec(cid:415) ons t 76 Shall be given in accordance with the principles laid
46 Fabric reinforcement m2 77 Fabric reinforcement in cages shall be given separately 17 Bending to form cages
78 No deduc(cid:415) ons shall be made for openings, wants, etc
47 General 79 The nature of the work and the general posi(cid:415) on and
accessibility of stressing anchors shall be described
80 The work shall be given under headings sta(cid:415) ng the
48 Pre-tensioned and post-tensioned tendon reinforcement m 81 Tendon reinforcement shall be measured between anchor-
ages and descrip(cid:415) ons shall include sheathing, sleeves,
threaded inlets and bleed pipes, suppor(cid:415) ng chairs,
marking posi(cid:415) ons of cables and grou(cid:415) ng or lubrica(cid:415) ng
49 Prescribed couplers No 82 Descrip(cid:415) ons shall include corrosion protec(cid:415) on and
50 Looped anchors, fanned anchors, dead anchors, 83 Descrip(cid:415) ons shall include helical anchor reinforcement,
intermediate anchors and stressing anchors at ends No recesses in concrete for anchors, holes through
trimming ends of tendons, corrosion protec(cid:415) on, fi lling
in recesses and preparing prescribed tensioning records
STANDARD METHOD OF MEASURING BUILDING WORK FOR AFRICA 2015 – FIRST EDITION PAGE 31
Item or work to be measured Unit Measurement rules Descrip(cid:415) ons shall be deemed Explanatory notes
1 Classifi ed according to compressive strength or mix of 1 Moulds
the backing and type of facing or fi nish
2 Work of similar design shall be suitably grouped under
headings sta(cid:415) ng the general requirements
3 Reinforcement may be included in the descrip(cid:415) ons or
given separately in accordance with the principles laid
4 Bedding, join(cid:415) ng and poin(cid:415) ng, fi nishing coats of sealer
and the like and prescribed protec(cid:415) ve measures shall
5 Metal cramps, dowels, brackets, bolts, etc and mor(cid:415) ces
and grou(cid:415) ng shall be included in the descrip(cid:415) ons of the
relevant precast concrete components where expedient
and mor(cid:415) ces and grou(cid:415) ng may be given separately in
1 Wall linings m2 7 Shall be separated into groups for slabs not exceeding
0,5m2 on face and therea(cid:332) er in successive stages of
8 Circular wall linings shall be given separately measured
over the fi nished face and sta(cid:415) ng the radius
9 No deduc(cid:415) on shall be made for openings, wants, etc
STANDARD METHOD OF MEASURING BUILDING WORK FOR AFRICA 2015 – FIRST EDITION PAGE 32
Item or work to be measured Unit Measurement rules Descrip(cid:415) ons shall be deemed Explanatory notes
4 Slab paving m2 10 No deduc(cid:415) ons shall be made for openings, wants, etc
7 Copings, sills, strings, cornices, steps and the like m 11 Circular work shall be given separately sta(cid:415) ng the mean
radius, dis(cid:415) nc(cid:415) on being made between straight and
8 Special blocks forming fair ends, rounded ends, angles, 12 Shall be given as extra over
9 Sundry components such as plant boxes, bins, etc No
10 Joint sealants, join(cid:415) ng strips, etc m 13 Alterna(cid:415) vely joint sealants, join(cid:415) ng strips, etc may be
included in the descrip(cid:415) ons of the relevant precast
STANDARD METHOD OF MEASURING BUILDING WORK FOR AFRICA 2015 – FIRST EDITION PAGE 33
Item or work to be measured Unit Measurement rules Descrip(cid:415) ons shall be deemed Explanatory notes
1 Classifi ed according to material and quality of the 1 Wedging, pinning, building
masonry unit, the bond and the composi(cid:415) on of the solid against frames etc
2 Separate items shall be given for diff erent components wall plates, base plates, etc
such as underpinning, mass work, piers, projec(cid:415) ons, 3 Ven(cid:415) la(cid:415) on fl ues through
breasts, stacks, chimneys, walls and linings walls for air bricks etc
3 Por(cid:415) ons of walling between openings shall not be 4 Building ends of ra(cid:332) ers,
4 Work threaded over ver(cid:415) cal reinforcement shall be into or through masonry
5 Circular work shall be given separately
1 Concrete fi lling to hollow walls, blockwork, etc 6 Shall be given in accordance with the principles laid
7 Alterna(cid:415) vely concrete fi lling may be included in the
descrip(cid:415) ons of the relevant items
3 Mass brickwork and piers
2 Mass brickwork, irregular shaped piers and the like m3 8 No deduc(cid:415) ons shall be made for voids not exceeding
3 Rectangular, L-shaped, X-shaped piers and the like m3 9 No deduc(cid:415) ons shall be made for voids not exceeding
10 Alterna(cid:415) vely regular shaped piers may be given in
STANDARD METHOD OF MEASURING BUILDING WORK FOR AFRICA 2015 – FIRST EDITION PAGE 34
Item or work to be measured Unit Measurement rules Descrip(cid:415) ons shall be deemed Explanatory notes
4 Solid walls and linings m2 11 Ba(cid:425) ered walls, ie walls of uniform thickness built to 5 Temporary supports to over-
ba(cid:425) er, shall be given separately sta(cid:415) ng the rate sailing faces
12 Brickwork with ba(cid:425) ered or oversailing face on one side 7 Hacking face or raking out
shall be given separately, sta(cid:415) ng the average thickness joints of new brickwork for
and the rate of ba(cid:425) er key for fi nishes
13 Wall (cid:415) es other than single wire type shall be included in
14 No deduc(cid:415) ons shall be made for openings and recesses
5 Hollow walls m2 15 The skins of hollow walls shall not be measured 8 Single wire type wall (cid:415) es
separately but the overall thickness and the thickness of 9 Hacking face or raking out
the individual skins shall be stated joints of new brickwork for
16 Wall (cid:415) es other than single wire type shall be included in key for fi nishes
the descrip(cid:415) ons 10 Open perpends
17 No deduc(cid:415) ons shall be made for openings and recesses
7 Vaul(cid:415) ng m2 18 Descrip(cid:415) ons shall include centering
8 Brick lintels m2 19 Shall be given separately only when the type of brick
and/or the composi(cid:415) on of the mortar diff ers from the
STANDARD METHOD OF MEASURING BUILDING WORK FOR AFRICA 2015 – FIRST EDITION PAGE 35
Item or work to be measured Unit Measurement rules Descrip(cid:415) ons shall be deemed Explanatory Notes
9 Forming toothings and bonding
9 Forming toothings and bonding new brickwork to
10 Hacking face or raking out joints of exis(cid:415) ng brickwork for key
10 Hacking face or raking out joints of exis(cid:415) ng brickwork
for key for fi nishes m2
11 Building brickwork to a fair face
11 Building brickwork to a fair face m2 20 Shall be given as extra over
12 Flues and fi nishing smooth thereof m 21 Horizontal, ver(cid:415) cal and raking fl ues shall be given
13 Splayed mortar fi llets in cavi(cid:415) es of hollow walls m 11 Mitres etc
14 Brickwork in closing cavi(cid:415) es of hollow walls m 22 Horizontal, ver(cid:415) cal and raking closing of cavi(cid:415) es shall be
15 Pilasters, bands, oversailing courses, cores for mouldings 23 Horizontal, ver(cid:415) cal and raking projec(cid:415) ons shall be given 12 Angles, ends, etc
and the like projec(cid:415) ng beyond the face of the wall m separately
SSTTAANNDDAARRDD SMYESTTHEMOD O OF FM MEAEASUSURRININGG B BUUILIDLDININGG W WOORRK K– FSOERV EANFTRHIC EAD 2I0TI1O5N – FIRST EDITION PPAAGGEE 03060
Item or work to be measured Unit Measurement rules Descrip(cid:415) ons shall be deemed Explanatory notes
17 Rough arches No 24 Shall be described as extra for rough arch sta(cid:415) ng the
shape, width of soffi t, span and number of rings or
25 Descrip(cid:415) ons shall include centres
18 Rough niches No 26 Shall be measured only when not rectangular
27 Descrip(cid:415) ons shall include closing of cavi(cid:415) es in hollow
walls, arches, shaped backs and heads, centres, etc
18 Joint forming material in movement joints
19 Joint forming material in movement joints m2
20 Steel fabric and welded reinforcement m 13 Building in
21 Bar reinforcement t 28 Diff erent diameters shall be given separately
22 Fabricated lintels m 29 Shall be grouped in lengths not exceeding 3m and 14 Propping
23 Turning pieces to brick lintels etc m 15 Propping
STANDARD METHOD OF MEASURING BUILDING WORK FOR AFRICA 2015 – FIRST EDITION PAGE 37
Item or work to be measured Unit Measurement rules Descrip(cid:415) ons shall be deemed Explanatory notes
30 Dis(cid:415) nc(cid:415) on for circular work shall be made between
work exceeding and not exceeding 2m radius
24 Face brickwork m2 31 Shall be given as extra over brickwork 16 Poin(cid:415) ng exposed tops or
32 Face brickwork to reveals and returns shall be measured soffi ts of ba(cid:425) ered and
to the net area exposed and shall be included with the oversailing work
general measurement of face brickwork
33 Face brickwork to piers and pilasters shall be given
34 Face brickwork to beamfi lling shall be given separately
35 Face brickwork with ba(cid:425) ered or oversailing face shall be
24 Walls faced both sides
25 Single skin brick walls faced both sides m2
26 Double skin brick walls faced both sides built in a bond
25 Cut face brick linings
27 Cut face brick linings to concrete etc m2 36 Wall (cid:415) es shall be included in the descrip(cid:415) ons
28 Fair raking, splay, circular and stepped cu(cid:427) ng and fair 37 Alterna(cid:415) vely fair cu(cid:427) ng may be included with the items
cut squint quoins and birdsmouth angles m causing the cu(cid:427) ng
29 Fair cu(cid:427) ng and fi (cid:427) ng around pipes No 38 Shall be grouped for pipes not exceeding 100mm
external diameter and therea(cid:332) er in stages of 100mm
STANDARD METHOD OF MEASURING BUILDING WORK FOR AFRICA 2015 – FIRST EDITION PAGE 38
Item or work to be measured Unit Measurement rules Descrip(cid:415) ons shall be deemed Explanatory notes
30 Fair cu(cid:427) ng and fi (cid:427) ng around joists, girders and the like No 39 Shall be measured only when cu(cid:427) ng to irregular profi le
is required. The shape and size of the joists, girders, etc
31 Forming toothings and bonding new face brickwork to
27 Special face bricks at angles
32 Special face bricks at squint quoins, birdsmouth angles, 40 Shall be given as extra over face brickwork 17 Angles, ends, etc
splayed or rounded angles and the like m
33 Face brick bands m 41 Shall be given as extra over brickwork 18 Angles, ends, etc
42 Horizontal, ver(cid:415) cal and raking face brick bands shall be
43 Descrip(cid:415) ons shall include projec(cid:415) ng or recessed
34 Face brick copings, lintels, sills, etc m 44 Horizontal and raking face brick copings etc shall be 19 Angles, ends, etc
35 Face brick arches No 45 Shall be given as extra over brickwork 20 Consequent cu(cid:427) ng
46 The shape, width of soffi t, span and number of rings or
depth, extent of poin(cid:415) ng and whether formed of
standard or special bricks, shall be stated
47 Descrip(cid:415) ons shall include centres
STANDARD METHOD OF MEASURING BUILDING WORK FOR AFRICA 2015 – FIRST EDITION PAGE 39
Item or work to be measured Unit Measurement rules Descrip(cid:415) ons shall be deemed Explanatory notes
36 Face brick niches No 48 Shall be measured only when not rectangular 21 Consequent cu(cid:427) ng
49 Shall be given as extra over brickwork
50 Descrip(cid:415) ons shall include closing of cavi(cid:415) es in hollow
walls, arches, shaped backs and heads, centres, etc and
whether formed of standard or special bricks
37 Blockwork 51 Shall be given in accordance with the foregoing
principles with the following being applicable in addi(cid:415) on
52 Descrip(cid:415) ons shall include standard complementary
blocks such as corner, three-quarter, half and
quarter blocks prescribed for the construc(cid:415) on of
corners, reveals, ends of walls, etc and for bonding
38 Piers and pilasters m 53 Descrip(cid:415) ons shall include corner blocks
34 Special blocks for copings, sills, lintels, etc
39 Special blocks for copings, sills, lintels, etc m 22 Angles, ends, etc
STANDARD METHOD OF MEASURING BUILDING WORK FOR AFRICA 2015 – FIRST EDITION PAGE 40
Item or work to be measured Unit Measurement rules Descrip(cid:415) ons shall be deemed Explanatory notes
40 Paving of bricks, concrete blocks, cement (cid:415) les, quarry 54 The pa(cid:425) ern shall be stated
(cid:415) les, etc m2 55 Features diff ering from the pa(cid:425) ern shall be given
separately and descrip(cid:415) ons shall include consequent
56 No deduc(cid:415) ons shall be made for openings, wants, etc
41 Margins and borders m 23 Fair edges, angles, ends, etc
42 Circular cu(cid:427) ng m 57 Measured only when not included with the items
36 Mass and irregular rubble work
44 Mass and irregular rubble work m3 58 No deduc(cid:415) ons shall be made for voids not exceeding
45 Walls and linings m2 59 No deduc(cid:415) ons shall be made for openings and recesses
STANDARD METHOD OF MEASURING BUILDING WORK FOR AFRICA 2015 – FIRST EDITION PAGE 41
Item or work to be measured Unit Measurement rules Descrip(cid:415) ons shall be deemed Explanatory notes
47 Facing and poin(cid:415) ng 60 Facing and poin(cid:415) ng shall be included in the descrip(cid:415) ons
of the relevant rubble work when prac(cid:415) cable. When not
prac(cid:415) cable facing and poin(cid:415) ng shall be given separately
in square meters, no dis(cid:415) nc(cid:415) on being made for diff erent
48 Copings, sills, lintels, arches and the like which diff er from 61 Alterna(cid:415) vely copings, sills, lintels, arches and the like 25 Angles, fair ends, etc
the general work m which diff er from the general work may be given in
49 Pitched angles m 62 Descrip(cid:415) ons shall state whether pitched from one or
42 Trimming to receive plaster etc
50 Trimming to receive plaster etc m2
51 Flues and fi nishing smooth thereof m
45 Turning pieces and centres
53 Turning pieces to lintels etc m 26 Propping
STANDARD METHOD OF MEASURING BUILDING WORK FOR AFRICA 2015 – FIRST EDITION PAGE 42
Item or work to be measured Unit Measurement rules Descrip(cid:415) ons shall be deemed Explanatory notes
63 Shall be classifi ed according to the nature of the work
64 Circular work, circular sunk work, spherical work and
spherical sunk work shall be given separately, the radius
65 Labours shall be included in the descrip(cid:415) ons of the
relevant work when prac(cid:415) cable. When not prac(cid:415) cable
labours shall be given separately
66 Descrip(cid:415) ons shall state the type of dressing and
dis(cid:415) nc(cid:415) on shall be made for sunk labours
47 Ashlar walling, linings and paving
55 Ashlar walling, linings and paving m2 67 Shall be measured over the exposed surface and
separated into groups for stones not exceeding 0,5m2
on face and therea(cid:332) er in successive stages of 0,5m2
68 No deduc(cid:415) ons shall be made for openings and recesses
57 Margins, skir(cid:415) ngs, cornices, copings, sills, kerbs, steps, 69 Shall be measured to the mean length
58 Special stones in angles, returned ends, apexes, etc No 70 Shall be given as extra over
59 Mouldings m 71 Shall be measured to the mean length
72 Descrip(cid:415) ons shall state the girth, width and projec(cid:415) on
STANDARD METHOD OF MEASURING BUILDING WORK FOR AFRICA 2015 – FIRST EDITION PAGE 43
Item or work to be measured Unit Measurement rules Descrip(cid:415) ons shall be deemed Explanatory notes
61 Columns, piers, lintels, etc and single stone sills, steps,
62 Stones in arches, surrounds, etc and in features which
diff er in material or fi nish from the general work No
63 Rough rebates, grooves, chases, joggle joints, etc m 27 Stops, mitres, etc
67 Metal cramps, dowels, (cid:415) es, etc and mor(cid:415) ces and 73 Shall be included in the descrip(cid:415) ons of the relevant
74 Alterna(cid:415) vely metal cramps, dowels, (cid:415) es, etc may be
56 Turning pieces and centres
68 Turning pieces to lintels etc m 28 Propping
STANDARD METHOD OF MEASURING BUILDING WORK FOR AFRICA 2015 – FIRST EDITION PAGE 44
Item or work to be measured Unit Measurement rules Descrip(cid:415) ons shall be deemed Explanatory notes
72 Sills, copings, etc of quarry (cid:415) les, cement (cid:415) les, 75 May be given in this trade when appropriate in
fi bre-cement and the like accordance with the foregoing principles
73 Decora(cid:415) ve screen walling and grilles of ornamental 76 Shall be given in accordance with the foregoing
74 Hoop iron (cid:415) es between concrete and masonry work, roof
76 Fireplaces No 77 Alterna(cid:415) vely fi replaces may be given in detail in
accordance with the foregoing principles
STANDARD METHOD OF MEASURING BUILDING WORK FOR AFRICA 2015 – FIRST EDITION PAGE 45
Item or work to be measured Unit Measurement rules Descrip(cid:415) ons shall be deemed Explanatory notes
1 Damp proof course m2 1 No dis(cid:415) nc(cid:415) on shall be made for horizontal, ver(cid:415) cal, in
2 Shall be classifi ed according to the nature of the work
and be given under appropriate headings such as to
2 Waterproofi ng to fl oors, roofs, balconies, showers, 3 Waterproofi ng to fl oors and roofs shall be given in the 1 Dressing generally 1 Overlapping of
inverted beams, box gu(cid:425) ers, channels, ducts, walls, etc m2 following categories: 2 Dressing into channels turn-ups and turn-
3.1 Flat – not exceeding 25 degrees from the horizontal downs with
3.2 Sloping – exceeding 25 degrees from the horizontal waterproofi ng to
sta(cid:415) ng the pitch ver(cid:415) cal surfaces
4 No deduc(cid:415) ons shall be made for openings, wants, etc shall not be
not exceeding 0,5m2 regarded as laps
5 Waterproofi ng in turn-ups and turn-downs not
exceeding 300mm girth shall be included in the general
6 Preparatory work, priming coats, adhesives, etc and
paper, felt, plas(cid:415) c and other underlays shall be included
7 Work to circular surfaces shall be given separately,
dis(cid:415) nc(cid:415) on being made between circular and spherical
3 Waterproofi ng in turn-ups and turn-downs exceeding
STANDARD METHOD OF MEASURING BUILDING WORK FOR AFRICA 2015 – FIRST EDITION PAGE 46
Item or work to be measured Unit Measurement rules Descrip(cid:415) ons shall be deemed Explanatory notes
4 Addi(cid:415) onal membranes, fi llets and sealing at turn-ups and 3 Angles etc
5 Dressing around pipes, handrails, into outlets, etc No 8 Shall be suitably grouped
9 Descrip(cid:415) ons shall include addi(cid:415) onal membranes, gussets,
8 Flashing strips m 4 Angles etc
9 Waterproofi ng to fl oors, roofs, balconies, showers, 10 Shall be given in accordance with the foregoing principles 5 Labours such as fair, rounded
inverted beams, box gu(cid:425) ers, channels, ducts, walls, with the following being applicable in addi(cid:415) on: and chamfered edges, trowel
thresholds, etc m2 10.1 Dis(cid:415) nc(cid:415) on shall be made between work to circular cuts, arrises, rounded
and spherical surfaces exceeding and not exceeding external angles, etc
10 Waterproofi ng in turn-ups and turn-downs m 11 The average height shall be stated 6 Angles etc
12 Fillets shall be included in the descrip(cid:415) ons
STANDARD METHOD OF MEASURING BUILDING WORK FOR AFRICA 2015 – FIRST EDITION PAGE 47
Item or work to be measured Unit Measurement rules Descrip(cid:415) ons shall be deemed Explanatory notes
11 Liquid waterproofi ng brushed or sprayed on m2 13 No deduc(cid:415) ons shall be made for openings, wants, etc
8 Membrane reinforced liquid waterproofi ng
12 Membrane reinforced liquid waterproofi ng brushed or 14 No deduc(cid:415) ons shall be made for openings, wants, etc
13 Dressing around pipes, handrails, into outlets, etc No 15 Descrip(cid:415) ons shall include addi(cid:415) onal membranes,
14 Waterstops m 7 Joints 2 Rubber and other
15 Angles and intersec(cid:415) ons to waterstops No
16 Sealing strips etc m 8 Joints, angles, intersec(cid:415) ons, 3 Polyolefi n and other
17 Joint sealants m 16 Sealants to joints in top surfaces, ver(cid:415) cal surfaces and 4 Resilient sealants to
soffi ts shall be given separately expansion joints etc
18 Waterproofi ng addi(cid:415) ves to concrete, plaster and the like 17 Shall be included in the appropriate items in the relevant
STANDARD METHOD OF MEASURING BUILDING WORK FOR AFRICA 2015 – FIRST EDITION PAGE 48
Item or work to be measured Unit Measurement rules Descrip(cid:415) ons shall be deemed Explanatory notes
1 Roof coverings and side and soffi t claddings m2 1 Shall be given in the following categories: 1 One-and-a-half width slates,
1.1 Roof coverings with pitches not exceeding (cid:415) les or shingles at verges
25 degrees 2 Holes for fi xing and notches
1.2 Roof coverings with pitches exceeding
1.5 Roof coverings and side and soffi t claddings to
2 Circular, spherical and conical work shall each be given
3 No deduc(cid:415) ons shall be made for openings, wants etc
4 Ba(cid:425) ens, underlays and fi xing accessories shall be
5 Alterna(cid:415) vely ba(cid:425) ens may be given in “Carpentry and
3 Undercloak course and any bedding and poin(cid:415) ng m
4 Double eaves course m 6 Shall be given as extra over and descrip(cid:415) ons shall include
4 Ridges, hips, closed valleys and ver(cid:415) cal angles
6 Ridges, hips, closed valleys and ver(cid:415) cal angles m 7 Descrip(cid:415) ons shall include soakers and addi(cid:415) onal ba(cid:425) ens 3 Ends, intersec(cid:415) ons, etc
STANDARD METHOD OF MEASURING BUILDING WORK FOR AFRICA 2015 – FIRST EDITION PAGE 49
Item or work to be measured Unit Measurement rules Descrip(cid:415) ons shall be deemed Explanatory notes
7 Purpose made (cid:415) les to ends and to intersec(cid:415) ons between 8 Shall be given as extra over
8 Insula(cid:415) on m2 9 Descrip(cid:415) ons shall include suppor(cid:415) ng wires and fi xing
9 Roof coverings and side and soffi t claddings m2 10 No deduc(cid:415) ons shall be made for openings, wants, etc 4 Dressing to hips, valleys,
not exceeding 0,5m2 eaves, verges and top edges
11 Dis(cid:415) nc(cid:415) on shall be made between general roof slopes
12 Thatch incorpora(cid:415) ng a spread layer to exposed soffi t
underlays or interlays and fi reproofi ng treatment shall
8 Ridges and apex caps
9 Ornamental bands and runners
12 Ornamental bands and runners m 6 Ends, intersec(cid:415) ons, etc
14 Ends, intersec(cid:415) ons, etc No 14 Shall be given as extra over
STANDARD METHOD OF MEASURING BUILDING WORK FOR AFRICA 2015 – FIRST EDITION PAGE 50
Item or work to be measured Unit Measurement rules Descrip(cid:415) ons shall be deemed Explanatory notes
15 Roof coverings and side and soffi t claddings m2 15 Shall be measured net on the undeveloped surface area 7 Holes for fi xing and notches
and shall be given in the following categories: 8 Forming drips and turn-ups
15.1 Roof coverings with pitches not exceeding to troughs of metal roof
15.2 Roof coverings with pitches exceeding 25 degrees
15.5 Roof coverings and side and soffi t claddings to
16 Roof coverings in single sheets exceeding 13m shall be
17 Circular work shall be given separately sta(cid:415) ng the radius
18 No deduc(cid:415) ons shall be made for openings, wants etc
19 Fixing accessories, sealing strips to laps and seam
s(cid:415) tching shall be included in the descrip(cid:415) ons
13 Cranks, bullnoses and curved turn-ups
17 Cranks, bullnoses and curved turn-ups m 20 Shall be given as extra over sta(cid:415) ng the angle and, where
STANDARD METHOD OF MEASURING BUILDING WORK FOR AFRICA 2015 – FIRST EDITION PAGE 51
Item or work to be measured Unit Measurement rules Descrip(cid:415) ons shall be deemed Explanatory notes
19 Accessories such as closers, ridge and hip coverings, 9 Holes for fi xing, notches, ends,
fl ashings, etc m angles and intersec(cid:415) ons
21 Ven(cid:415) lator sheets, sheets with fl anges for pipes, etc No 21 Shall be given as extra over the shee(cid:415) ng in which they
22 Panels of translucent shee(cid:415) ng and isolated translucent 22 Shall be given as extra over the shee(cid:415) ng in which they
23 Alterna(cid:415) vely panels and sheets may be given in number
17 Roof ven(cid:415) lators and roofl ights
23 Roof ven(cid:415) lators and roofl ights No 24 Alterna(cid:415) vely ven(cid:415) lators and roofl ights may be given in
metres in which case ends, corners, etc shall be given in
24 Insula(cid:415) on m2 25 Descrip(cid:415) ons shall include suppor(cid:415) ng wires and fi xing
STANDARD METHOD OF MEASURING BUILDING WORK FOR AFRICA 2015 – FIRST EDITION PAGE 52
Item or work to be measured Unit Measurement rules Descrip(cid:415) ons shall be deemed Explanatory notes
25 Roof coverings and side and soffi t claddings m2 26 Shall be given in the following categories: 10 Angles, bending, dressing,
26.1 Roof coverings with pitches not exceeding bossing, wedging, holes for
25 degrees fi xing and notches
26.2 Roof coverings with pitches exceeding 25 degrees
26.5 Roof coverings and side and soffi t claddings to
27 Circular, spherical and conical work shall be given
28 Turn-ups and turn-downs shall be added to the general
29 No deduc(cid:415) ons shall be made for openings, wants etc
soldering, brazing, burning and nailing shall be included
in the descrip(cid:415) ons sta(cid:415) ng the extent of the laps and the
STANDARD METHOD OF MEASURING BUILDING WORK FOR AFRICA 2015 – FIRST EDITION PAGE 53
Item or work to be measured Unit Measurement rules Descrip(cid:415) ons shall be deemed Explanatory notes
soldering, brazing, burning and nailing shall be included bossing, wedging, holes for
in the descrip(cid:415) ons sta(cid:415) ng the extent of the laps and the fi xing and notches
32 The radius of circular work shall be stated
28 Circular cu(cid:427) ng m 33 Alterna(cid:415) vely circular cu(cid:427) ng may be included in the
29 Flashings m2 34 Alterna(cid:415) vely fl ashings may be given in metres 12 Ends, angles and intersec(cid:415) ons
35 Stepped cover fl ashings to roof pitches exceeding
25 degrees shall be given separately sta(cid:415) ng the pitch
36 Alterna(cid:415) vely fl ashings may be included with the relevant
items of roof coverings and side claddings
30 Flashings around pipes through roof coverings etc No 37 Shall be grouped for pipes not exceeding 100mm
external diameter and therea(cid:332) er in stages of 100mm
31 Linings to valleys and gu(cid:425) ers, copings and the like m2 38 Alterna(cid:415) vely linings etc may be given in metres 13 Ends, angles and intersec(cid:415) ons
STANDARD METHOD OF MEASURING BUILDING WORK FOR AFRICA 2015 – FIRST EDITION PAGE 54
Item or work to be measured Unit Measurement rules Descrip(cid:415) ons shall be deemed Explanatory notes
1 Timber 1 Shall be classifi ed according to species and quality
2 Any required pre-treatment such as kiln drying and im-
pregna(cid:415) on and any required pre-selec(cid:415) on shall be stated
3 Sawn and wrought (cid:415) mbers shall be given separately
4 Timber described as wrought shall be deemed to be
5 Wrought faces on sawn (cid:415) mbers shall be included in the
descrip(cid:415) ons of linear items but may be given in square
6 Circular work shall be given separately sta(cid:415) ng the radius
and where necessary, sta(cid:415) ng which faces are circular
2 Protec(cid:415) ve surface treatment such as creosote m2
3 Circular cu(cid:427) ng, rounded angles, rebates, grooves, 7 Labours shall be included in the descrip(cid:415) ons of (cid:415) mber 1 Mitres, intersec(cid:415) ons, splay cut
chamfers, moulded edges, etc m which is given linear ends, stops, etc
4 Rounded corners, scribed ends, shaped ends, etc No
5 Fixing (cid:415) mberwork 8 The method of fi xing shall be stated 2 Nails, screws, plugs, adhesives,
9 Holes and tapping of metalwork for the fi xing of (cid:415) mber holes, sinking, etc
may be included in the descrip(cid:415) ons of the relevant
(cid:415) mberwork or included with the relevant metalwork
STANDARD METHOD OF MEASURING BUILDING WORK FOR AFRICA 2015 – FIRST EDITION PAGE 55
CARPENTRY AND JOINERY con(cid:415) nued
Item or work to be measured Unit Measurement rules Descrip(cid:415) ons shall be deemed Explanatory notes
6 Structural (cid:415) mbers m 11 Shall be measured to net lengths as fi xed 3 Joints in the length
12 Structural (cid:415) mbers, other than laminated (cid:415) mbers, 4 Holes, splay cut ends and
required to be in single lengths, shall be given in the mitres
12.2 Lengths exceeding 2,4m and not exceeding 3,9m
12.3 Lengths exceeding 3,9m and not exceeding 6,6m
13 Laminated (cid:415) mbers required to be in single lengths
exceeding 13m and not exceeding 18m shall be given
14 Members of roof trusses may be grouped together but
trimmers, fl oor and ceiling joists and the like shall be
7 Wrought ends and wrought and shaped ends of sawn
8 Fasteners, clips and connectors such as split rings and 5 Grooves for split rings
9 Shaped laminated (cid:415) mbers such as portal frames,
5 Plate nailed (cid:415) mber roof truss construc(cid:415) on
10 Plate nailed (cid:415) mber roof trusses No 6 Splay cut ends, mitres, join(cid:415) ng,
gussets and (cid:415) mber connectors
11 Valleys and hips Sets
STANDARD METHOD OF MEASURING BUILDING WORK FOR AFRICA 2015 – FIRST EDITION PAGE 56
CARPENTRY AND JOINERY con(cid:415) nued
Item or work to be measured Unit Measurement rules Descrip(cid:415) ons shall be deemed Explanatory notes
5 Plate nailed (cid:415) mber roof truss construc(cid:415) on (con(cid:415) nued)
12 Wall plates, bracing, purlins, ba(cid:425) ens, etc 15 Shall be given in accordance with clause 4 “Structural
13 Alterna(cid:415) ve 16 Alterna(cid:415) vely plate nailed (cid:415) mber roof truss construc(cid:415) on
may be given as an item in which case descrip(cid:415) ons shall
14 Roof and weather boarding, boarding to tank stands, 17 No deduc(cid:415) ons shall be made for openings, wants, etc 7 Notches and holes
gu(cid:425) er boarding and the like m2 not exceeding 0,5m2
15 Nosings and edge strips m 8 Mitres and intersec(cid:415) ons
16 Trapdoors No 18 Shall be given as extra over and descrip(cid:415) ons shall
17 Eaves soffi t covering 19 Shall be given in accordance with the principles laid
down in “Ceilings, Par(cid:415) (cid:415) ons and Access Flooring”
18 Fascias, barge boards, etc m 20 Join(cid:415) ng strips shall be included in the descrip(cid:415) ons 9 Mitres and intersec(cid:415) ons
19 Boarding m2 21 No deduc(cid:415) ons shall be made for openings, wants, etc 10 Notches and holes
21 Ba(cid:425) ens for boarding on concrete fl oors m 22 Fixing accessories such as clips, wire (cid:415) es, anchors, etc
and saw-cuts in ba(cid:425) ens for same shall be included in
22 Skir(cid:415) ngs m 23 Skir(cid:415) ngs stepped over treads and risers of stairs shall be
STANDARD METHOD OF MEASURING BUILDING WORK FOR AFRICA 2015 – FIRST EDITION PAGE 57
CARPENTRY AND JOINERY con(cid:415) nued
Item or work to be measured Unit Measurement rules Descrip(cid:415) ons shall be deemed Explanatory notes
23 Doors, windows, sashes, fanlights, fl y screens and 24 Descrip(cid:415) ons shall include weatherboards, glazing
shu(cid:425) ers No beads, fi xing beads, edge strips, etc
25 Descrip(cid:415) ons of cased frames with sashes shall
include pulleys, cords, counter weights and spring
24 Frames, mullions, transoms, posts, linings, architraves, 26 Framed work shall be given separately 11 Mitres and intersec(cid:415) ons
cover strips, beads, etc m 27 Alterna(cid:415) vely frames for doors and windows may be
28 Descrip(cid:415) ons shall include rounded angles, rebates,
25 Dado rails, picture rails, etc m 12 Mitres and intersec(cid:415) ons
26 Shelves, divisions, sides, tops and the like m2 29 Solid (cid:415) mber exceeding 300mm wide shall be given 13 Housing, notches and holes
30 No deduc(cid:415) ons shall be made for openings, wants,
31 Descrip(cid:415) ons shall include edge strips applied during
27 Edge strips and veneered or thermose(cid:427) ng plas(cid:415) c 14 Mitres and intersec(cid:415) ons
28 Thermose(cid:427) ng plas(cid:415) c laminate boards with formed
STANDARD METHOD OF MEASURING BUILDING WORK FOR AFRICA 2015 – FIRST EDITION PAGE 58
CARPENTRY AND JOINERY con(cid:415) nued
Item or work to be measured Unit Measurement rules Descrip(cid:415) ons shall be deemed Explanatory notes
29 Standards, rails, cover strips, beads, skir(cid:415) ngs, etc 32 Framed work shall be given separately 15 Mitres and intersec(cid:415) ons
30 Fi(cid:427) ngs 33 Shall be measured in detail under headings and given in
accordance with the foregoing principles and when of
similar design shall be suitably grouped sta(cid:415) ng the
general requirements and the number
34 Alterna(cid:415) vely fi (cid:427) ngs may be given in number
31 Doors, drawers, cash bowls and the like No 35 Timber guides and runners shall be included in the
duckboards, etc No duckboards, etc may be measured in detail and given in
accordance with the foregoing principles
33 General 37 Stairs of similar design shall be suitably grouped under
headings sta(cid:415) ng the general requirements
35 Treads and risers m 38 Descrip(cid:415) ons shall include blocking pieces
38 Bearers, stringers, apron linings, cappings, handrails, 39 Wreathed work shall be so described 16 Mitres and intersec(cid:415) ons
etc m 40 Con(cid:415) nuous handrails shall be so described and
descrip(cid:415) ons shall include heading joints
39 Bends, ramps, knees, wreaths, scrolled ends, etc No 41 Shall be given as extra over
40 Balusters and newels No 42 Descrip(cid:415) ons shall include framing and housing
43 Balusters and newels framed or housed on rake shall
STANDARD METHOD OF MEASURING BUILDING WORK FOR AFRICA 2015 – FIRST EDITION PAGE 59
CARPENTRY AND JOINERY con(cid:415) nued
Item or work to be measured Unit Measurement rules Descrip(cid:415) ons shall be deemed Explanatory notes
41 Panelling m2 44 Descrip(cid:415) ons shall state whether panels are to be 17 Notches and holes
45 Framed panelling shall be suitably grouped for panels of
diff erent widths and descrip(cid:415) ons shall state the height
and the number of panels to the height and shall include
46 Spandrel panelling shall be given separately
47 No deduc(cid:415) ons shall be made for openings, wants, etc
48 No allowance shall be made in the measurement of
boarded panelling for laps and tongues and net widths
42 Acous(cid:415) c and vermin-proof linings, fabric backings, 49 Alterna(cid:415) vely acous(cid:415) c and vermin-proof linings, fabric
etc m2 backings, etc may be included in the descrip(cid:415) ons of the
43 Grounds m 50 Alterna(cid:415) vely grounds may be included in the 18 Mitres and intersec(cid:415) ons
cover strips, beads, edge strips and surrounds m
46 Plas(cid:415) c, fi bre-cement, etc 51 Plas(cid:415) c, fi bre-cement and other processed materials shall
be given in accordance with the foregoing principles
STANDARD METHOD OF MEASURING BUILDING WORK FOR AFRICA 2015 – FIRST EDITION PAGE 60
CEILINGS, PARTITIONS AND ACCESS FLOORING
Item or work to be measured Unit Measurement rules Descrip(cid:415) ons shall be deemed Explanatory notes
1 Ceilings shall be given under headings separa(cid:415) ng nailed- 1 Notches and holes
up and suspended ceilings, dis(cid:415) nc(cid:415) on being made
between horizontal, sloping and ver(cid:415) cal ceilings
2 No deduc(cid:415) ons shall be made for openings, wants, etc
3 Brandering shall be included in the descrip(cid:415) ons of
nailed-up ceilings. When brandering is not to a regular
pa(cid:425) ern it shall be given separately in metres
4 Circular work shall be given separately sta(cid:415) ng the mean
5 Proprietary support systems for suspended ceilings shall
be included in the descrip(cid:415) ons of the ceilings
5.1 When the support system is not to a regular
pa(cid:425) ern it shall be given separately, in which case
brandering or bearers shall be given in metres and
from which ceilings are suspended shall be given
5.3 Separate items shall be given for ceilings etc
suspended not exceeding 1m below suspension
level and therea(cid:332) er in successive stages of 1m
6 Cover strips, join(cid:415) ng strips, etc shall be included in the
7 Plastering shall be included in the descrip(cid:415) ons
3 Flush margins and borders not exceeding 1,2m wide of 8 Shall be given in successive widths of 300mm
material diff ering from the general ceiling material m
STANDARD METHOD OF MEASURING BUILDING WORK FOR AFRICA 2015 – FIRST EDITION PAGE 61
CEILINGS, PARTITIONS AND ACCESS FLOORING con(cid:415) nued
Item or work to be measured Unit Measurement rules Descrip(cid:415) ons shall be deemed Explanatory notes
4 Bulkheads in ceilings which occur at a level or plane 9 Dimensions of all faces shall be given in the descrip(cid:415) on
diff ering from the general ceiling level or plane, of which 10 Por(cid:415) ons in excess of 1,2m shall be included with the
no horizontal, ver(cid:415) cal or sloping dimension exceeds ceilings where expedient or given separately in m2
1,2m m 11 Alterna(cid:415) vely, when linear measurement is not
prac(cid:415) cable, bulkheads shall be given in detail in
5 Fire barriers and the like m 12 Alterna(cid:415) vely, when linear measurement is not
prac(cid:415) cable, fi re barriers and the like shall be given in
6 Trapdoors No 13 Shall be given as extra over ceilings, bulkheads, etc 2 Trimmers
7 Cornices m 3 Mitres and intersec(cid:415) ons
8 Openings for light fi (cid:427) ngs, mechanical diff users, etc No 14 Shall be given as extra over ceilings, bulkheads, etc 4 Addi(cid:415) onal trimmers, hangers,
9 Insula(cid:415) on materials such as fi breglass and slagwool m2 15 Sta(cid:415) ng whether in panels such as between roof (cid:415) mbers
10 Par(cid:415) (cid:415) ons m 16 Descrip(cid:415) ons shall include fi nishes 5 Notches and holes other than
17 Alterna(cid:415) vely fi nishes may be given in appropriate items in glass
in accordance with the principles laid down in the 6 Cleats, screws, bolts, plates,
11 Notches and holes in glass No
12 Ends, intersec(cid:415) ons, openings, doors and frames, special 18 Shall be given as extra over
panels, etc No 19 Descrip(cid:415) ons shall include ironmongery and fi nishes
20 Alterna(cid:415) vely ironmongery and fi nishes may be given in
appropriate items in accordance with the principles laid
down in the relevant trades
STANDARD METHOD OF MEASURING BUILDING WORK FOR AFRICA 2015 – FIRST EDITION PAGE 62
CEILINGS, PARTITIONS AND ACCESS FLOORING con(cid:415) nued
Item or work to be measured Unit Measurement rules Descrip(cid:415) ons shall be deemed Explanatory notes
shall be measured in detail in which case boards, glass, in glass
etc shall be given in square metres, standards, rails, mul- 8 Mitres, intersec(cid:415) ons, cleats,
in metres and panels, doors, fanlights, borrowed lights
22 Ironmongery and fi nishes shall be given in accordance
with the principles laid down in the relevant trades
15 Insula(cid:415) on materials such as fi breglass and slagwool if not
included with panels etc m2
16 Access fl ooring m2 23 Descrip(cid:415) ons shall include panels, support system, 9 Li(cid:332) ing and replacing panels
coverings, etc for work executed under
24 No deduc(cid:415) ons shall be made for openings, wants, fl oors by others
17 Ven(cid:415) la(cid:415) on grille panels, strengthened panels, etc No 25 Shall be given as extra over
18 Junc(cid:415) ons against walls, columns, etc m 26 Circular junc(cid:415) ons shall be given separately 10 Addi(cid:415) onal pedestals and other
20 Dividers and fi re barriers below access fl ooring m
21 Holes and outlets through fl oor panels and dividers No
STANDARD METHOD OF MEASURING BUILDING WORK FOR AFRICA 2015 – FIRST EDITION PAGE 63
Item or work to be measured Unit Measurement rules Descrip(cid:415) ons shall be deemed Explanatory notes
1 Wood block, wood mosaic, thermoplas(cid:415) c, vinyl, 1 Preparatory work, priming coats and adhesives shall be
linoleum, rubber, cork, carpe(cid:415) ng and other similar included in the descrip(cid:415) ons
coverings and linings m2 2 Descrip(cid:415) ons shall include welding of plas(cid:415) c or rubber
3 Descrip(cid:415) ons shall include underfelt for carpe(cid:415) ng
4 Margins, borders and turn-ups exceeding 500mm wide
or high shall be included in the general areas
5 Linings to reveals etc shall be included in the general
6 Work to circular surfaces shall be given separately
7 Dished fl ooring shall be given separately
8 No deduc(cid:415) ons shall be made for openings, wants,
3 Margins, borders and turn-ups not exceeding 500mm 9 Circular work may include circular cu(cid:427) ng to surrounding 1 Mitres etc
wide or high m work where expedient
4 Insets m or 10 Circular work may include circular cu(cid:427) ng to surrounding 2 Mitres etc
5 Edge and cover strips
5 Edge and cover strips m 3 Mitres etc
6 Skir(cid:415) ngs of vinyl etc m 11 Skir(cid:415) ngs stepped over treads and risers of stairs shall be 4 Mitres etc
STANDARD METHOD OF MEASURING BUILDING WORK FOR AFRICA 2015 – FIRST EDITION PAGE 64
FLOOR COVERINGS, WALL LININGS, ETC con(cid:415) nued
Item or work to be measured Unit Measurement rules Descrip(cid:415) ons shall be deemed Explanatory notes
7 Covering to treads and risers m2 12 Covering to winding stairs shall be given separately
8 Combined tread and riser coverings m 5 Mitres etc
11 Polish, sealers, etc m2 13 Alterna(cid:415) vely polish, sealers, etc may be included in the
STANDARD METHOD OF MEASURING BUILDING WORK FOR AFRICA 2015 – FIRST EDITION PAGE 65
Item or work to be measured Unit Measurement rules Descrip(cid:415) ons shall be deemed Explanatory notes
1 Ironmongery fi xed to (cid:415) mber, metalwork, masonry, etc 1 Screws, plugs, etc and the
2 Prepara(cid:415) on of metal doors and frames to receive metalwork, masonry, etc
ironmongery shall be included with the doors and
rails, etc, sets of fl oor spring hinges, sets of sliding gear
3 Locks No 3 Descrip(cid:415) ons shall include keys
4 “En suite” locks and master keys shall each be given
4 Metal shelving, wall bands, standards and rails 5 Metal shelving shall be measured in detail with
shelving, wall bands, standards and rails given in metres
or in number and shelf brackets, foot pieces and the
6 Alterna(cid:415) vely metal shelving may be given in number as
a unit including all components
seats, etc of metal, (cid:415) mber or other materials No
STANDARD METHOD OF MEASURING BUILDING WORK FOR AFRICA 2015 – FIRST EDITION PAGE 66
Item or work to be measured Unit Measurement rules Descrip(cid:415) ons shall be deemed Explanatory notes
1 Steelwork shall be classifi ed according to the quality and
2 Structures of similar nature and design shall be suitably
grouped under headings sta(cid:415) ng the general
3 Circular work shall be given separately sta(cid:415) ng the mean
radius and where necessary which faces are circular
4 Work required to be prepared or painted before
5 Work required to be galvanised, metal sprayed, epoxy
coated or otherwise treated or fi nished shall be so
6 Work specifi cally required to be treated or fi nished
delivery to the site shall be so described
7 Steelwork shall be measured to the designed sizes of 1 Scribed ends
8 The calcula(cid:415) on of masses shall be in accordance with
“Structural Steel Tables” issued by the South African
9 No allowance shall be made in the mass for rolling
decora(cid:415) ve or protec(cid:415) ve treatment nor for temporary
bol(cid:415) ng and rive(cid:415) ng integral with structural steelwork
shall be included in the descrip(cid:415) ons of the relevant
11 Rolled sec(cid:415) ons in single lengths exceeding 13m and not
exceeding 18m shall be given separately and therea(cid:332) er
STANDARD METHOD OF MEASURING BUILDING WORK FOR AFRICA 2015 – FIRST EDITION PAGE 67
Item or work to be measured Unit Measurement rules Descrip(cid:415) ons shall be deemed Explanatory notes
1 Columns, beams and other members t 12 Shall be classifi ed according to cross-sec(cid:415) onal size
2 Compound and la(cid:427) ced columns, beams and other 13 Shall be so described sta(cid:415) ng the cross-sec(cid:415) onal size of
members t the main components
3 Caps, bases and connec(cid:415) ons 14 Shall be included in the descrip(cid:415) ons of the relevant
members, no dis(cid:415) nc(cid:415) on being made for size or shape
and their mass shall be added to the mass thereof
4 Roof trusses t 15 Shall be given in one item for each truss or each group
of similar trusses sta(cid:415) ng for each item the number of
16 The cross-sec(cid:415) onal size of components of a truss need
5 Purlins, girts, bracing, sag rods, etc t 17 The type of components (fl ats, angles, tees, tubes, etc)
18 Connec(cid:415) ons shall be included in the descrip(cid:415) ons of the
relevant members and their mass shall be added to the
19 The cross-sec(cid:415) onal size of components need not be
6 Roof gu(cid:425) ers, rainwater pipes, etc integral with structural 20 Shall be given in suitable inclusive items
steelwork t 21 The mass of angles, stopped ends, outlets, off sets, shoes,
etc shall be included in the mass of the roof gu(cid:425) er etc
7 Stairs, balustrading, handrails, cat ladders, fl ooring, etc t or 22 Shall be given in suitable inclusive items sta(cid:415) ng for each
integral with structural steelwork kg item the construc(cid:415) on, type of components (fl ats, angles,
tees, tubes, etc) and the number where relevant
23 The cross-sec(cid:415) onal size of components need not be
STANDARD METHOD OF MEASURING BUILDING WORK FOR AFRICA 2015 – FIRST EDITION PAGE 68
Item or work to be measured Unit Measurement rules Descrip(cid:415) ons shall be deemed Explanatory notes
9 Bends and machined ends No
10 High tensile bolts and high strength fric(cid:415) on grip bolts 24 Shall be given separately under the relevant headings
including nuts and washers t
11 Ragbolts, expanding bolts, anchor bolts, machined bolts, 25 Descrip(cid:415) ons shall include nuts and washers,
etc No 26 Dis(cid:415) nc(cid:415) on shall be made for those requiring to be
embedded in tops, sides or soffi ts of concrete
12 Patent balustrading, patent clips and other items integral m or
with structural steelwork not marketed in mass No
STANDARD METHOD OF MEASURING BUILDING WORK FOR AFRICA 2015 – FIRST EDITION PAGE 69
Item or work to be measured Unit Measurement rules Descrip(cid:415) ons shall be deemed Explanatory notes
1 Metalwork shall be classifi ed according to type, quality
2 Circular work shall be given separately sta(cid:415) ng the
mean radius and where necessary which faces are
3 Work required to be prepared or painted before
delivery to the site shall be so described
enamelled, vitreous enamelled or otherwise treated or
5 Work specifi cally required to be treated or fi nished
delivery to the site shall be so described
rive(cid:415) ng shall be included in the descrip(cid:415) ons of the
2 Rolled or drawn solid sec(cid:415) ons kg 7 Shall be measured to the designed sizes of components
8 Calcula(cid:415) on of masses shall be in accordance with the
“Structural Steel Tables” issued by the South African
9 No allowance shall be made in the mass for rolling
or protec(cid:415) ve treatment nor for temporary
10 The cross-sec(cid:415) onal size of components shall be stated
STANDARD METHOD OF MEASURING BUILDING WORK FOR AFRICA 2015 – FIRST EDITION PAGE 70
Item or work to be measured Unit Measurement rules Descrip(cid:415) ons shall be deemed Explanatory notes
4 Tubular columns No 11 Descrip(cid:415) ons shall include cap and base plates
5 Screwed and socketed piping 12 Shall be given in accordance with the principles laid
6 Shee(cid:415) ng, wire mesh, screening, expanded metal, 13 No deduc(cid:415) ons shall be made for openings, wants, etc 1 Holes and notches
gra(cid:415) ngs and the like m2 not exceeding 0,5m2
7 Bolts including nuts and washers kg
8 Ragbolts, expanding bolts, anchor bolts, etc No 14 Descrip(cid:415) ons shall include nuts and washers
15 Dis(cid:415) nc(cid:415) on shall be made for those requiring to be
embedded in tops, sides or soffi ts of concrete
9 Stairs, balustrading, cat ladders, grilles, gates, kg or 16 Shall be given in inclusive items sta(cid:415) ng for each item
framework, etc m or the construc(cid:415) on and the cross-sec(cid:415) onal size of
No components and the number where relevant
17 Alterna(cid:415) vely when inclusive items are not prac(cid:415) cable,
work of similar design shall be suitably grouped under
headings sta(cid:415) ng the general requirements in which case
separate items shall be given for the diff erent
10 Fanged, rounded, scribed, closed and scrolled ends, 18 Shall be given as extra over rails etc 2 Running joints
STANDARD METHOD OF MEASURING BUILDING WORK FOR AFRICA 2015 – FIRST EDITION PAGE 71
Item or work to be measured Unit Measurement rules Descrip(cid:415) ons shall be deemed Explanatory notes
6 Fixing accessories to structural (cid:415) mberwork
12 Bolts including nuts and washers kg
13 Ragbolts, expanding bolts, anchor bolts, etc No 19 Dis(cid:415) nc(cid:415) on shall be made for those requiring to be
embedded in tops, sides or soffi ts of concrete
7 Ribbed fl oors and permanent decking
14 Ribbed fl oors and permanent decking m2 20 Shall be measured net on the plane or undeveloped
21 No deduc(cid:415) ons shall be made for openings, wants, etc
8 Floors etc formed of open grillework or gra(cid:415) ngs
16 Floors etc formed of open grillework or gra(cid:415) ngs m2 22 If in banded panels the sizes of the panels shall be stated
23 No deduc(cid:415) ons shall be made for openings, wants, etc
18 Skir(cid:415) ngs, picture rails, copings, etc m 24 Skir(cid:415) ngs stepped over treads and risers of stairs shall be 3 Running joints and mitres
19 Corner pieces, end caps, switch sockets, etc No 25 Shall be given as extra over
steel, brass, bronze, etc shall be given in accordance
with the foregoing principles
27 Solid sec(cid:415) ons of metals not marketed in mass shall be
STANDARD METHOD OF MEASURING BUILDING WORK FOR AFRICA 2015 – FIRST EDITION PAGE 72
Item or work to be measured Unit Measurement rules Descrip(cid:415) ons shall be deemed Explanatory notes
21 Pressed steel door frames No 28 The size of the door, fanlight, sidelight, etc shall be
29 Ironmongery normally supplied by the manufacturers
of the frames shall be included in the descrip(cid:415) ons
accommodated shall be included in the descrip(cid:415) ons or
22 Pressed steel doors No 31 Descrip(cid:415) ons shall include frames and ironmongery
23 Windows, doors, etc of rolled sec(cid:415) ons No 32 Ironmongery and a(cid:425) ached burglar bars shall be included
33 Components of coupled windows and doors may be
given separately, in which case coupling mullions and
transoms shall be given either in metres or in number
34 Sub-frames, sills, surrounds, sliding gear, etc may be 4 Mitres etc
included in the descrip(cid:415) ons or given separately in metres
35 Steel and other panels, fi xed steel louvres and fi xed
louvre shoes may be included in the descrip(cid:415) ons or given
14 Fly screens and burglar screens
24 Fly screens and burglar screens No
STANDARD METHOD OF MEASURING BUILDING WORK FOR AFRICA 2015 – FIRST EDITION PAGE 73
Item or work to be measured Unit Measurement rules Descrip(cid:415) ons shall be deemed Explanatory notes
25 Adjustable louvre insert units No 36 Descrip(cid:415) ons shall include glass louvre blades
26 Strongroom doors, roller shu(cid:425) ers, collapsible gates, roof
27 Windows, doors, fl y screens, burglar screens, adjustable 37 Shall be given in accordance with the principles
louvre insert units, etc laid down in sub-sec(cid:415) on “Steel door frames, doors,
windows, etc” but descrip(cid:415) ons shall include glass and
other panels and sealing of windows, doors, etc against
28 General 38 Curtain walls, shopfronts, etc shall be suitably grouped
under headings sta(cid:415) ng the general requirements
39 Separate items shall be given for the diff erent
29 Components such as heads, sills, transoms and mullions m or 40 Waterproofi ng and sealing components, insula(cid:415) on 5 Mitres, intersec(cid:415) ons, cleats,
No between diff erent metals and electrical bonding shall screws, bolts, plates, etc
30 Windows, doors, fanlights, grilles, panels, glass, etc No 41 Descrip(cid:415) ons shall include ironmongery and fi nishes
and other integral work may be measured separately
and given in appropriate items in accordance with the
principles laid down in the relevant trades
STANDARD METHOD OF MEASURING BUILDING WORK FOR AFRICA 2015 – FIRST EDITION PAGE 74
Item or work to be measured Unit Measurement rules Descrip(cid:415) ons shall be deemed Explanatory notes
31 Insula(cid:415) ng material such as fi breglass and slagwool not
included with panels etc m2
32 Cladding to structural steel components and to columns, 43 Measurement rule 40 above applies 6 Mitres, intersec(cid:415) ons, cleats,
33 Alterna(cid:415) ve 44 Where prac(cid:415) cable curtain walls, shopfronts, etc may
be given in number in which case descrip(cid:415) ons shall
etc as well as cladding to structural steel components,
45 Measurement rule 40 above applies
STANDARD METHOD OF MEASURING BUILDING WORK FOR AFRICA 2015 – FIRST EDITION PAGE 75
Item or work to be measured Unit Measurement rules Descrip(cid:415) ons shall be deemed Explanatory notes
coff ered work, work to falls or to falls and currents,
work incorpora(cid:415) ng hea(cid:415) ng or similar equipment and
work in sunk or raised panels not exceeding 2m2 shall
3 Work to circular surfaces shall be given separately,
dis(cid:415) nc(cid:415) on being made between circular and spherical
2 Plaster and other in situ fi nishes
1 Finishes to elements such as fl oors and landings, treads 4 Finishes shall be measured over the net area to be 1 Curing
and risers of stairs, walls inclusive of fl ush columns and covered 2 Labours such as fair, rounded
beams, columns, ceilings and beams m2 5 No deduc(cid:415) ons shall be made for openings, wants, and chamfered edges, trowel
etc not exceeding 0,5m2 cuts, throats, V-joints and
6 Reedings to treads shall be included in the angles
2 Finishes to narrow widths not exceeding 300mm wide 7 Shall be described as narrow widths and no
– except to treads and risers of stairs, columns, beams, dis(cid:415) nc(cid:415) on shall be made for diff erent components
troughed, ribbed and coff ered work and that in the
fl ush face caused by projec(cid:415) ons and openings m2
STANDARD METHOD OF MEASURING BUILDING WORK FOR AFRICA 2015 – FIRST EDITION PAGE 76
Item or work to be measured Unit Measurement rules Descrip(cid:415) ons shall be deemed Explanatory notes
5 Skir(cid:415) ngs m 8 Skir(cid:415) ngs stepped over treads and risers of stairs shall be 4 Ends, mitres etc
7 Finishes to kerbs, sills, copings, nibs, surrounds and the 5 Ends, mitres, etc
8 Mouldings m 9 The girth, width and projec(cid:415) on shall be stated
10 Descrip(cid:415) ons shall include ends, mitres and intersec(cid:415) ons
when the girth does not exceed 300mm
9 Ends, mitres and intersec(cid:415) ons when the girth of the
12 Dividing strips, edge trims, etc m 6 Mitres etc
13 Metal lathing and the like to receive in situ fi nishes m2 7 Laps and holes
STANDARD METHOD OF MEASURING BUILDING WORK FOR AFRICA 2015 – FIRST EDITION PAGE 77
Item or work to be measured Unit Measurement rules Descrip(cid:415) ons shall be deemed Explanatory notes
1 Shall be classifi ed according to the type and size of (cid:415) le,
2 Tiling laid to a pa(cid:425) ern shall be so described
3 Tiling to falls or to falls and currents and (cid:415) ling in
isolated panels not exceeding 1m2 shall be given
4 Work to circular surfaces shall be given separately,
dis(cid:415) nc(cid:415) on being made between work exceeding and
not exceeding 300mm radius and also between
circular and spherical work
1 Beds and backings 5 Beds and backings shall be included in the descrip(cid:415) ons
6 When (cid:415) ling is prescribed to be fi xed with adhesive
the beds and backings shall be given separately in
7 Beds and backings incorpora(cid:415) ng hea(cid:415) ng or similar
2 Tiling to elements such as fl oors and landings, walls 8 Shall be measured over the net area to be covered 1 Poin(cid:415) ng fair exposed edges
inclusive of fl ush columns and beams, columns, ceilings 9 No deduc(cid:415) ons shall be made for openings, wants, etc
and beams m2 not exceeding 0,1m2
3 Tiling to narrow widths not exceeding 300mm wide – 10 Shall be described as narrow widths and no dis(cid:415) nc(cid:415) on
except to columns, beams and that in the fl ush face shall be made for diff erent components
caused by projec(cid:415) ons and openings m2
5 Fair exposed cu(cid:427) ng and fi (cid:427) ng around pipes, balusters 11 Shall be suitably grouped
STANDARD METHOD OF MEASURING BUILDING WORK FOR AFRICA 2015 – FIRST EDITION PAGE 78
Item or work to be measured Unit Measurement rules Descrip(cid:415) ons shall be deemed Explanatory notes
5 Mitred corners and special edge and corner (cid:415) les
7 Special edge and corner (cid:415) les m 12 Shall be given as extra over, no dis(cid:415) nc(cid:415) on being made
for diff erent components
8 Treads, risers, sills, copings, skir(cid:415) ngs, bands, margins, 13 Skir(cid:415) ngs etc stepped over treads and risers of stairs 2 Mitres etc
beads, mouldings and the like m shall be given separately
9 End (cid:415) les and external and internal angle (cid:415) les No 14 Shall be given as extra over
10 Scum and block channels m
11 Fair ends, stopped ends, intersec(cid:415) ons, angles and 15 Shall be given as extra over
12 Soap dishes, foot rests, toilet paper holders, access 3 Forming recesses etc
panels and the like No
13 Dividing strips, edge trims, etc m 4 Mitres etc
STANDARD METHOD OF MEASURING BUILDING WORK FOR AFRICA 2015 – FIRST EDITION PAGE 79
Item or work to be measured Unit Measurement rules Descrip(cid:415) ons shall be deemed Explanatory notes
2 Angles, stopped ends, outlets, off sets, shoes, etc No 1 Shall be given as extra over
4 Short isolated precast channels No 1 For long lengths
5 Pipes m 2 Pipes and pipe fi (cid:427) ngs which are wrapped, coated or 2 Short lengths, nipples and
lined in the course of manufacture shall be so running joints such as sock-
3 The method of join(cid:415) ng shall be stated 3 Bending, join(cid:415) ng pipes of dif-
4 No dis(cid:415) nc(cid:415) on shall be made between pipes fi xed fering materials and join(cid:415) ng
ver(cid:415) cally, horizontally or to falls nor between pipes pipes to taps, valves, traps,
fi xed to diff erent elements, cast in, built in, etc etc
5 Pipes chased in and pipes suspended exceeding 1m 4 Pipe supports such as clips,
below suspension level shall be given separately saddles, holderbats, hangers,
6 Pipework in ground shall be given separately and etc
descrip(cid:415) ons may include pipe trenches in accordance 5 Holes for pipes and cu(cid:427) ng
with clause 4 “Pipe trenches (method B)” and fi (cid:427) ng around pipes
unless otherwise stated in the
6 Welded joints No 7 Alterna(cid:415) vely, where expedient welded joints may be
included in the descrip(cid:415) ons of the piping
7 Flanges on pipes and gasket and bolt sets No 8 Alterna(cid:415) vely, where expedient fl anges on pipes and
gasket and bolt sets may be included in the
STANDARD METHOD OF MEASURING BUILDING WORK FOR AFRICA 2015 – FIRST EDITION PAGE 80
PLUMBING AND DRAINAGE con(cid:415) nued
Item or work to be measured Unit Measurement rules Descrip(cid:415) ons shall be deemed Explanatory notes
8 Prescribed purpose made pipe supports 9 Shall be given separately in accordance with the
principles laid down in the relevant trades
9 Service pipes and fl exible connec(cid:415) ng pipes No 10 Descrip(cid:415) ons shall include connectors
10 Pipe fi (cid:427) ngs No 11 Shall be given as extra over
etc to pipes not exceeding 30mm internal diameter
shall be given together for each diameter of pipe
13 Fi(cid:427) ngs to pipes exceeding 30mm internal diameter
shall be given separately for each diameter of pipe and
14 Flanges on pipe fi (cid:427) ngs shall be included in the
11 Adaptors or similar pipe fi (cid:427) ngs at joints between pipes 15 Shall be given in accordance with the principles laid
of diff ering materials and at connec(cid:415) ons of pipes to taps, down for pipe fi (cid:427) ngs
12 Pipe closers which are prescribed to be measured on 16 Shall be given as extra over the pipe in which they
site and cut to exact length No occur
STANDARD METHOD OF MEASURING BUILDING WORK FOR AFRICA 2015 – FIRST EDITION PAGE 81
PLUMBING AND DRAINAGE con(cid:415) nued
Item or work to be measured Unit Measurement rules Descrip(cid:415) ons shall be deemed Explanatory notes
14 Pipe trenches 17 Shall be given in accordance with the principles laid 6 Any addi(cid:415) onal excava(cid:415) on and
down in “Earthworks” backfi lling necessary at joints,
18 Where no width of excava(cid:415) on is prescribed it shall be risk of collapse of excava(cid:415) ons
calculated as follows: and keeping excava(cid:415) ons free
Trenches not exceeding 1m deep shall be taken of such of water
width as to provide a clearance of 300mm on each
side of the pipe or group of pipes. The width of the
trench shall be increased by 100mm for each
successive depth of 1m to a maximum width which
provides a clearance of 500mm on each side of the
15 Bedding under and fi lling around pipes comprising 19 No deduc(cid:415) on shall be made for pipes not exceeding
sand, crushed stone, concrete, etc m3 200mm external diameter
16 Pipe trenches 20 Where expedient pipe trenches may be included in 7 Any addi(cid:415) onal excava(cid:415) on and
the descrip(cid:415) ons of the pipe or group of pipes and backfi lling necessary at joints,
separated into successive total depths in increments of risk of collapse of excava(cid:415) ons
1m, in which case descrip(cid:415) ons shall include excava- and keeping excava(cid:415) ons free
(cid:415) on, bedding, backfi lling, compac(cid:415) on and disposal of of water
21 Excava(cid:415) ons in material of a more diffi cult character
shall be suitably classifi ed and given in cubic metres as
extra over, in which case the width of the excava(cid:415) ons
shall be determined as described in clause 3 “Pipe
STANDARD METHOD OF MEASURING BUILDING WORK FOR AFRICA 2015 – FIRST EDITION PAGE 82
PLUMBING AND DRAINAGE con(cid:415) nued
Item or work to be measured Unit Measurement rules Descrip(cid:415) ons shall be deemed Explanatory notes
17 Insula(cid:415) ng and protec(cid:415) ve wrappings, coa(cid:415) ngs and 22 Internal diameter of the pipe shall be stated 2 Other than those
linings to pipes m applied in the
18 Insula(cid:415) on etc around fi (cid:427) ngs, valves, etc to pipes not 23 Shall be given together as extra over for each diameter
exceeding 30mm internal diameter No of pipe
19 Insula(cid:415) on etc around fi (cid:427) ngs, valves, etc to pipes 24 Shall be given separately as extra over for each
exceeding 30mm internal diameter No diameter of pipe and for each type of fi (cid:427) ng, valve, etc
20 Concrete encasing to pipes m 25 Alterna(cid:415) vely encasing may be given in cubic metres in 8 Formwork
which case no deduc(cid:415) on shall be made for pipes not
21 Concrete anchor blocks, thrust blocks, etc 26 Shall be given in accordance with the principles laid
27 Alterna(cid:415) vely blocks may be given in number in which
case descrip(cid:415) ons shall include formwork and
23 Inspec(cid:415) on chambers, catch pits, junc(cid:415) on boxes, valve 28 Shall be given in accordance with the principles laid
boxes, sep(cid:415) c tanks, conservancy tanks, etc down in the relevant trades
29 Alterna(cid:415) vely inspec(cid:415) on chambers, catch pits, etc may
STANDARD METHOD OF MEASURING BUILDING WORK FOR AFRICA 2015 – FIRST EDITION PAGE 83
PLUMBING AND DRAINAGE con(cid:415) nued
Item or work to be measured Unit Measurement rules Descrip(cid:415) ons shall be deemed Explanatory notes
24 Soakage pits, french drains, etc No 30 Alterna(cid:415) vely soakage pits, french drains, etc may be
given in accordance with the principles laid down in
2255 CCoonnnneecc(cid:415)(cid:415) oonnss ooff nneeww ttoo eexxiiss(cid:415)(cid:415) nngg ppiippeess NNoo 9 Necessary fi (cid:427) ngs
25 Connec(cid:415) ons to services of the local authority Item 31 Shall be allowed for by provisional sum
STANDARD METHOD OF MEASURING BUILDING WORK FOR AFRICA 2015 – FIRST EDITION PAGE 84
PLUMBING AND DRAINAGE con(cid:415) nued
Item or work to be measured Unit Measurement rules Descrip(cid:415) ons shall be deemed Explanatory notes
FIRE HOSE REELS AND FIRE FIGHTING EQUIPMENT
16 Fire hose reels etc
31 Fire hose reels, booster connec(cid:415) ons, hydrants, pressure
33 Sleeves through slabs, beams, walls, etc No 32 Shall be given together grouped for pipes not exceeding
100mm external diameter and therea(cid:332) er in stages of
34 Holes for pipes and cu(cid:427) ng and fi (cid:427) ng around pipes 33 Shall be given in the relevant trades where stated
35 Flashings around pipes through roof coverings 34 Shall be given in “Roof Coverings, Claddings, etc”
36 Tes(cid:415) ng Item 35 Various systems shall be kept separate
STANDARD METHOD OF MEASURING BUILDING WORK FOR AFRICA 2015 – FIRST EDITION PAGE 85
Item or work to be measured Unit Measurement rules Descrip(cid:415) ons shall be deemed Explanatory notes
1 Classifi ed according to the nature of the installa(cid:415) on such
as high tension supply, low tension supply, low tension
1 Connec(cid:415) on to main supply Item 2 Shall be allowed for by provisional sum
3 Main supply and equipment
stays, struts, other equipment and bases No
4 Distribu(cid:415) on boards, switch boards, meter boards and 3 Given under headings and classifi ed according to type 1 Iden(cid:415) fi ca(cid:415) on markers, labels,
the like No 4 Descrip(cid:415) ons shall include busbars, jumpers, neutral bars, legend cards, etc
internal wiring and connec(cid:415) ons, space for future equip-
ment blanking and the like
5 Equipment such as isolators, circuit breakers, earth leak- 5 Alterna(cid:415) vely equipment may be included in the descrip-
age units, transformers, (cid:415) me switches, surge protectors (cid:415) ons of the boards
STANDARD METHOD OF MEASURING BUILDING WORK FOR AFRICA 2015 – FIRST EDITION PAGE 86
Item or work to be measured Unit Measurement rules Descrip(cid:415) ons shall be deemed Explanatory notes
6 Cables m 2 Allowance for snaking
7 Cable termina(cid:415) ons and prescribed running joints No 3 Glands and allowance for
8 Protec(cid:415) on such as slabs and metal shee(cid:415) ng and warning
devices such as PVC marker tapes m
10 Cable trenches 6 Shall be given in accordance with the principles laid 4 Risk of collapse of
down in “Earthworks” excava(cid:415) ons and keeping
7 Where no width of excava(cid:415) on is prescribed it shall be excava(cid:415) ons free of water
Trenches not exceeding 1m deep shall be taken of
such width as to provide a clearance of 300mm on
each side of the cable or group of cables. The width
of the trench shall be increased by 100mm for each
successive depth of 1m to a maximum width which
provides a clearance of 500mm on each side of the
11 Bedding under and fi lling around cables comprising sand
STANDARD METHOD OF MEASURING BUILDING WORK FOR AFRICA 2015 – FIRST EDITION PAGE 87
Item or work to be measured Unit Measurement rules Descrip(cid:415) ons shall be deemed Explanatory notes
12 Cable trenches 8 Where expedient cable trenches may be included in 5 Risk of collapse of
the descrip(cid:415) on of the cable or group of cables and excava(cid:415) ons and keeping
separated into successive total depths in increments of excava(cid:415) ons free of water
1m, in which case descrip(cid:415) ons shall include excava(cid:415) on,
bedding, backfi lling, compac(cid:415) on and disposal of surplus
9 Excava(cid:415) ons in material of a more diffi cult character shall
be suitably classifi ed and given in cubic metres as extra
over, in which case the width of the excava(cid:415) ons shall
be determined as described in clause 6 “Cable trenches
1133 CCoonndduuiitt m 10 No dis(cid:415) nc(cid:415) on shall be made between conduit fi xed 6 Bending, threading, join(cid:415) ng,
11 No dis(cid:415) nc(cid:415) on shall be made between conduit fi xed to bends, tees, saddles, draw
diff erent elements, cast in, chased in, built in, etc boxes and the like
7 Holes for conduit and cu(cid:427) ng
15 Switch, socket and other outlet boxes No 12 No dis(cid:415) nc(cid:415) on shall be made for number of entries 9 Locknuts and bushes
16 Cover plates, dome covers, ball and socket covers and 13 Alterna(cid:415) vely cover plates etc may be included in the
the like No descrip(cid:415) ons of the outlet boxes
STANDARD METHOD OF MEASURING BUILDING WORK FOR AFRICA 2015 – FIRST EDITION PAGE 88
Item or work to be measured Unit Measurement rules Descrip(cid:415) ons shall be deemed Explanatory notes
17 Cable trunking, cable trays and ladders, fl oor and skir(cid:415) ng 10 Forming holes for conduit
18 Fi(cid:427) ngs to cable trunking etc such as angles, stopped
19 Suspension rods, fi xing brackets, cable clamps and short 14 Alterna(cid:415) vely suspension rods etc may be included in the
lengths of channel for cable trunking fi xing No descrip(cid:415) ons of the trunking etc
20 Draw wires required to be le(cid:332) in m 15 Alterna(cid:415) vely draw wires may be included in the descrip-
21 Bare and insulated conductors in conduit etc m 11 Allowance for addi(cid:415) onal
22 Open wired conductors m 16 Descrip(cid:415) ons shall include bobbins, cleats, clips and
24 Fi(cid:427) ngs etc such as elbows, tees, crosses, end covers, 17 Alterna(cid:415) vely fi xing brackets may be included in the
feed units, tap-off boxes and fi xing brackets No descrip(cid:415) ons of the busbars
14 Socket outlets and light switches
25 Socket outlets and light switches No 18 Descrip(cid:415) ons shall include cover plates
26 Luminaires, bells, telephones, speakers, geysers, stoves, 19 Lamps shall be included with the relevant luminaires 12 Moun(cid:415) ng plates, brackets,
heaters, clocks, thermostats, starters, motors, stand-by 20 Alterna(cid:415) vely lamps may be given separately in number connectors, etc
STANDARD METHOD OF MEASURING BUILDING WORK FOR AFRICA 2015 – FIRST EDITION PAGE 89
Item or work to be measured Unit Measurement rules Descrip(cid:415) ons shall be deemed Explanatory notes
27 Earthing the system Item
29 Conductors of tape, wire and the like m 13 Bending and join(cid:415) ng
30 Short coupling lengths such as between roofs and eaves 14 Join(cid:415) ng and excava(cid:415) on
gu(cid:425) ers and from down conductors to earth terminals No
31 Air and earth terminals No
32 Holes for conduit and cu(cid:427) ng and fi (cid:427) ng around conduit 21 Shall be given in the relevant trades where stated
19 Communica(cid:415) on, security and control installa(cid:415) ons
33 Installa(cid:415) ons such as telecommunica(cid:415) on, public address, 22 Shall be given in accordance with the foregoing
closed circuit television, data transmission, access principles
STANDARD METHOD OF MEASURING BUILDING WORK FOR AFRICA 2015 – FIRST EDITION PAGE 90
Item or work to be measured Unit Measurement rules Descrip(cid:415) ons shall be deemed Explanatory notes
34 Tes(cid:415) ng and commissioning the installa(cid:415) on Item
STANDARD METHOD OF MEASURING BUILDING WORK FOR AFRICA 2015 – FIRST EDITION PAGE 91
Item or work to be measured Unit Measurement rules Descrip(cid:415) ons shall be deemed Explanatory notes
HEATING, VENTILATION AND AIR CONDITIONING INSTALLATIONS, ETC
1 Classifi ed according to the nature of the installa(cid:415) on such
1 Items of equipment such as chillers and heat pumps, air 2 Descrip(cid:415) ons shall include pipework, ductwork and elec-
handling equipment, fans, air condi(cid:415) oning units, heat trical work integral with the item of equipment, paint or
exchangers, motors, pumps, boilers, tanks, compressors, other fi nishes, accessories where expedient, assembling
a(cid:425) enuators, etc No and join(cid:415) ng together of components and join(cid:415) ng to
pipes, ducts and the like as well as vibra(cid:415) on isola(cid:415) on
2 Pipes m 3 Pipes and pipe fi (cid:427) ngs which are wrapped, coated or 1 Short lengths, nipples and
lined in the course of manufacture shall be so described running joints such as sockets,
4 Pipework prescribed to be temporarily fi xed in posi(cid:415) on, collars, couplers, etc
dismantled for pla(cid:415) ng or other fi nishing and 2 Bending pipes, join(cid:415) ng pipes
subsequently refi xed shall be so described of diff ering materials and joint-
5 Pipework to be executed in prescribed cut lengths shall ing pipes to taps, valves, traps,
6 The method of join(cid:415) ng shall be stated 3 Pipe supports such as clips,
7 No dis(cid:415) nc(cid:415) on shall be made between pipes fi xed saddles, holderbats, hangers,
ver(cid:415) cally, horizontally or to falls, nor between pipes fi xed etc
to diff erent elements, cast in, built in, etc 4 Holes for pipes and cu(cid:427) ng
8 Pipes chased in and pipes suspended exceeding 1m and fi (cid:427) ng around pipes unless
below suspension level shall be given separately otherwise stated in the
9 Pipework in ground shall be given separately and relevant trades
descrip(cid:415) ons may include pipe trenches in accordance
STANDARD METHOD OF MEASURING BUILDING WORK FOR AFRICA 2015 – FIRST EDITION PAGE 92
Item or work to be measured Unit Measurement rules Descrip(cid:415) ons shall be deemed Explanatory notes
3 Welded joints No 10 Alterna(cid:415) vely, where expedient welded joints may be
included in the descrip(cid:415) ons of the piping
4 Flanges on pipes and gasket and bolt sets No 11 Alterna(cid:415) vely, where expedient fl anges on pipes and
gasket and bolt sets may be included in the
5 Prescribed purpose-made pipe supports 12 Shall be given separately in accordance with the
principles laid down in the relevant trades
6 Service pipes and fl exible connec(cid:415) ng pipes No 13 Descrip(cid:415) ons shall include connectors
7 Pipe fi (cid:427) ngs No 14 Shall be given as extra over
etc to pipes not exceeding 60mm internal diameter
shall be given together for each diameter of pipe
16 Fi(cid:427) ngs to pipes exceeding 60mm internal diameter
shall be given separately for each diameter of pipe
and for each type of fi (cid:427) ng
17 Flanges on pipe fi (cid:427) ngs shall be included in the
8 Adaptors or similar pipe fi (cid:427) ngs at joints between pipes 18 Shall be given in accordance with the principles laid
of diff ering materials and at connec(cid:415) ons of pipes to taps, down for pipe fi (cid:427) ngs
9 Pipe closers which are prescribed to be measured on site 19 Shall be given as extra over the pipe in which they
and cut to exact length No occur
STANDARD METHOD OF MEASURING BUILDING WORK FOR AFRICA 2015 – FIRST EDITION PAGE 93
Item or work to be measured Unit Measurement rules Descrip(cid:415) ons shall be deemed Explanatory notes
12 Pipe trenches 20 Shall be given in accordance with the principles laid 5 Any addi(cid:415) onal excava(cid:415) on and
down in “Earthworks” backfi lling necessary at joints,
21 Where no width of excava(cid:415) on is prescribed it shall be risk of collapse of excava(cid:415) ons
calculated as follows: and keeping excava(cid:415) ons free
Trenches not exceeding 1m deep shall be taken of such of water
width as to provide a clearance of 300mm on each side
of the pipe or group of pipes. The width of the trench
shall be increased by 100mm for each successive depth
of 1m to a maximum width which provides a clearance
of 500mm on each side of the pipe or group of pipes
13 Bedding under and fi lling around pipes comprising sand, 22 No deduc(cid:415) on shall be made for pipes not exceeding
crushed stone, concrete, etc m3 200mm external diameter
14 Pipe trenches 23 Where expedient pipe trenches may be included in 6 Any addi(cid:415) onal excava(cid:415) on and
the descrip(cid:415) ons of the pipe or group of pipes and backfi lling necessary at joints,
separated into successive total depths in increments of risk of collapse of excava(cid:415) ons
1m, in which case descrip(cid:415) ons shall include excava(cid:415) on, and keeping excava(cid:415) ons free
bedding, backfi lling, compac(cid:415) on and disposal of surplus of water
24 Excava(cid:415) ons in material of a more diffi cult character shall
be suitably classifi ed and given in cubic metres as extra
over, in which case the width of the excava(cid:415) ons shall
be determined as described in clause 5 “Pipe trenches
STANDARD METHOD OF MEASURING BUILDING WORK FOR AFRICA 2015 – FIRST EDITION PAGE 94
Item or work to be measured Unit Measurement rules Descrip(cid:415) ons shall be deemed Explanatory notes
15 Insula(cid:415) ng and protec(cid:415) ve wrappings, coa(cid:415) ngs and linings 25 Internal diameter of the pipe shall be stated 1 Other than those
16 Insula(cid:415) on etc around fi (cid:427) ngs, valves, etc to pipes not 26 Shall be given together as extra over for each diameter
exceeding 60mm internal diameter No of pipe
17 Insula(cid:415) on etc around fi (cid:427) ngs, valves, etc to pipes 27 Shall be given separately as extra over for each diameter
exceeding 60mm internal diameter No of pipe and for each type of fi (cid:427) ng, valve, etc
18 Concrete encasing to pipes m 28 Alterna(cid:415) vely encasing may be given in cubic metres in 7 Formwork
which case no deduc(cid:415) ons shall be made for pipes not
19 Concrete anchor blocks, thrust blocks, etc 29 Shall be given in accordance with the principles laid
30 Alterna(cid:415) vely blocks may be given in number in which
case descrip(cid:415) ons shall include formwork and
20 Inspec(cid:415) on chambers, junc(cid:415) on boxes, etc 31 Shall be given in accordance with the principles laid
down in the relevant trades
32 Alterna(cid:415) vely inspec(cid:415) on chambers, catch pits, etc may
STANDARD METHOD OF MEASURING BUILDING WORK FOR AFRICA 2015 – FIRST EDITION PAGE 95
Item or work to be measured Unit Measurement rules Descrip(cid:415) ons shall be deemed Explanatory notes
21 Rectangular low pressure galvanised sheet metal 33 Shall be measured over duc(cid:415) ng fi (cid:427) ngs and grouped 8 Join(cid:415) ng
duc(cid:415) ng m2 according to size in the following categories:
33.1 Width or height not exceeding 750mm and sum
of two adjacent sides not exceeding 1,15m
33.2 Width or height not exceeding 750mm and sum
of two adjacent sides exceeding 1,15m
33.3 Width or height exceeding 750mm and not
33.4 Width or height exceeding 1,35m and not
34 Where an in-line reduc(cid:415) on in size of duc(cid:415) ng occurs, the
larger size shall be measured over the full length of the
ver(cid:415) cally, horizontally or raking nor between duc(cid:415) ng
fi xed to diff erent elements
36 Separate items shall be given for duc(cid:415) ng suspended not
exceeding 1m below suspension level and therea(cid:332) er in
successive stages of 1m measured from the underside
structure from which duc(cid:415) ng is suspended shall be
37 Duc(cid:415) ng to a curve shall be given separately sta(cid:415) ng the
38 Supports shall be included in the descrip(cid:415) ons of duc(cid:415) ng
or may be given separately in accordance with the
principles laid down in the relevant trades
22 Round low pressure galvanised sheet metal duc(cid:415) ng m 39 Shall be measured over duc(cid:415) ng fi (cid:427) ngs 9 Join(cid:415) ng
40 Measurement rules 34 to 38 above apply
23 Rectangular duc(cid:415) ng other than low pressure galvanised
STANDARD METHOD OF MEASURING BUILDING WORK FOR AFRICA 2015 – FIRST EDITION PAGE 96
Item or work to be measured Unit Measurement rules Descrip(cid:415) ons shall be deemed Explanatory notes
24 Duc(cid:415) ng fi (cid:427) ngs No 41 Shall be given as extra over 10 Forming openings and
spigots, branches and tees shall be given together for
43 All other duc(cid:415) ng fi (cid:427) ngs shall be given separately for
each category or size of duc(cid:415) ng and for each type of
44 Stopped ends shall be given separately for each
25 Flexible duc(cid:415) ng No 45 Shall be grouped for duc(cid:415) ng not exceeding 1,5m girth 11 Join(cid:415) ng
46 Descrip(cid:415) ons shall include connectors
26 Insula(cid:415) ng and protec(cid:415) ve wrappings, coa(cid:415) ngs and linings 47 Shall be measured to the external or internal surface of 12 Working around duc(cid:415) ng
48 Alterna(cid:415) vely wrappings etc may be included in the
49 Li(cid:332) installa(cid:415) ons shall be suitably grouped under head-
ings sta(cid:415) ng whether it comprises a single li(cid:332) or a bank
STANDARD METHOD OF MEASURING BUILDING WORK FOR AFRICA 2015 – FIRST EDITION PAGE 97
Item or work to be measured Unit Measurement rules Descrip(cid:415) ons shall be deemed Explanatory notes
28 Cars No 50 Descrip(cid:415) ons shall include frames, guides, enclosures,
base, car doors, door opening devices, locking and
fi (cid:427) ngs such as handrails, mirrors, etc and ligh(cid:415) ng and
29 Landing entrances No 51 Descrip(cid:415) ons shall include frames, sills, landing doors,
door opening devices, locking and safety devices, etc
30 Power units No 52 Descrip(cid:415) ons shall include supports, sheaves, sound
31 Support work in li(cid:332) sha(cid:332) s comprising guide rails,
brackets, plates, buff ers, supports, sheave beams, etc Item
32 Ropes comprising cables, clamps, etc Item
34 Governors and safety gears Item
35 Opera(cid:415) on and control system comprising car operator
36 Temporary use of li(cid:332) s comprising temporary enclosures,
15 Hoist, escalator and conveyor installa(cid:415) ons
37 Hoist, escalator and conveyor installa(cid:415) ons 53 Shall be given in accordance with the principles laid
STANDARD METHOD OF MEASURING BUILDING WORK FOR AFRICA 2015 – FIRST EDITION PAGE 98
Item or work to be measured Unit Measurement rules Descrip(cid:415) ons shall be deemed Explanatory notes
16 Building management systems etc
38 Building management and equipment control systems 54 Shall be given in accordance with the foregoing
17 Material handling installa(cid:415) ons, disposal installa(cid:415) ons, etc
39 Installa(cid:415) ons such as material handling, refuse disposal, 55 Shall be given in accordance with the foregoing
40 Tes(cid:415) ng and commissioning Item 56 Descrip(cid:415) ons shall include details of tes(cid:415) ng and require-
ments such as provision of instruments and appliances,
22 Electrical work and work by other trades
44 Electrical work and work by other trades integral with 57 Shall be given in accordance with the principles laid
mechanical installa(cid:415) ons down in the relevant trades
STANDARD METHOD OF MEASURING BUILDING WORK FOR AFRICA 2015 – FIRST EDITION PAGE 99
Item or work to be measured Unit Measurement rules Descrip(cid:415) ons shall be deemed Explanatory notes
1 Classifi ed according to type, quality, thickness and size
2 Descrip(cid:415) ons of glass shall state the method of glazing
and the material of the frames to receive the glass
3 Descrip(cid:415) ons of glass in beaded frames shall state the
method by which beads are fi xed
4 Glass shall be grouped according to size in the following
4.2 Exceeding 0,1m2 and not exceeding 0,5m2
4.3 Exceeding 0,5m2 and not exceeding 2m2
2 Glass in shapes which are not rectangular m2
3 Glazing beads 5 Glazing beads shall be given separately in the relevant
4 Glazing gaskets, cover beading and the like m 1 Mitres
5 Moulded corners to gaskets No 6 Shall be given as extra over
6 Sealing of joints in panes with silicone m
7 Grounding, sandblas(cid:415) ng, embossing or brilliant cu(cid:427) ng 7 Descrip(cid:415) ons shall include designs
8 Labours to edges such as bevelled or polished m
10 Glass louvre blades No 8 Descrip(cid:415) ons shall include labours to edges
STANDARD METHOD OF MEASURING BUILDING WORK FOR AFRICA 2015 – FIRST EDITION PAGE 100
Item or work to be measured Unit Measurement rules Descrip(cid:415) ons shall be deemed Explanatory notes
11 Glass tops, shelves, doors, mirrors, etc No 9 Descrip(cid:415) ons shall include labours to edges, holes, fi nger
12 Panes of bent glass No 10 The radius shall be stated
7 Leaded and coppered lights
13 Panels of leaded or coppered lights m2 11 Descrip(cid:415) ons shall state the shape and average size of
panes and method of fi xing and shall include cames,
14 Patent glazing No 12 Descrip(cid:415) ons shall include all components forming an
integral part of the glazing system
13 Alterna(cid:415) vely when inclusive numbered items are
not prac(cid:415) cable, patent glazing may be given in detail
in which case glass shall be given in square metres
grouped according to size in the categories provided
for in clause 1 “Classifi ca(cid:415) on etc”. Glazing bars, glazing
wings, head and sill members, dividers, etc shall be
given in metres and stops, fi xing saddles and the like
shall be given in number. Descrip(cid:415) ons shall include
cleats, bolts, plates and other incidentals
15 Materials resembling glass such as acrylic, polycar- 14 Shall be given in accordance with the foregoing
STANDARD METHOD OF MEASURING BUILDING WORK FOR AFRICA 2015 – FIRST EDITION PAGE 101
Item or work to be measured Unit Measurement rules Descrip(cid:415) ons shall be deemed Explanatory notes
1 Classifi ed according to the specifi ca(cid:415) on of the paint,
preparatory work and the material to be painted such
being made between fl oated and textured plaster
surfaces and smooth and rough concrete surfaces
2 Separate items shall be given for paintwork on diff erent
components, except where they can be suitably grouped
3 Paintwork on columns, beams, ribs, hoods and fi ns shall
be included with pain(cid:415) ng walls or ceilings as the case
4 Paintwork shall be classifi ed in the diff erent colour
accordance with the Natural Colour System (NCS)
5 Paintwork in one colour group may be given as extra
over paintwork in another colour group
6 No further dis(cid:415) nc(cid:415) on shall be made for colour except for
6.1 Paintwork on mouldings and bands picked out in
colours diff ering from the surrounding paintwork,
6.2 Paintwork on walls, ceilings, etc to pa(cid:425) erns in more
than one colour, which shall be given separately as
1 Paintwork generally m2 7 No deduc(cid:415) ons shall be made for openings, wants, etc 1 Cu(cid:427) ng in of edges
2 Paintwork on profi led surfaces m2 8 May be measured over the fl at area sta(cid:415) ng that the work
STANDARD METHOD OF MEASURING BUILDING WORK FOR AFRICA 2015 – FIRST EDITION PAGE 102
Item or work to be measured Unit Measurement rules Descrip(cid:415) ons shall be deemed Explanatory notes
3 Paintwork on gates, grilles, burglar screens, balustrades, 9 Shall be measured over the full fl at area of both sides
etc m2 10 Alterna(cid:415) vely paintwork may be given in detail in
accordance with the principles laid down for paintwork
not exceeding 300mm wide or girth and not adjoining
4 Paintwork not exceeding 300mm wide or girth and not
adjoining similarly painted work m
6 Paintwork on members of trusses and la(cid:427) ce work m2
8 Paintwork on windows, sash doors, fanlights, louvred 11 Shall be measured over the full fl at area of both sides
units, etc m2 12 Pain(cid:415) ng “co(cid:425) age pane” windows etc and windows with
burglar bars, steel louvres, etc shall be given separately
9 Le(cid:425) ers, numerals, fi gures, mo(cid:415) fs and punctua(cid:415) on 13 Shall be given together in one item, dis(cid:415) nc(cid:415) on being
marks No made for height and style only
10 Polishing 14 Polishing shall be given in accordance with the
STANDARD METHOD OF MEASURING BUILDING WORK FOR AFRICA 2015 – FIRST EDITION PAGE 103
Item or work to be measured Unit Measurement rules Descrip(cid:415) ons shall be deemed Explanatory notes
1 Classifi ed according to the type of material, preparatory
work and the nature of the surfaces to be prepared
1 Paperhanging to elements such as walls inclusive of 2 No deduc(cid:415) ons shall be made for openings, wants, etc 1 Matching
columns and ceilings inclusive of beams m2 not exceeding 0,5m2
2 Border and panel strips m 3 Descrip(cid:415) ons shall include cu(cid:427) ng to profi le 2 Mitres and intersec(cid:415) ons
4 Hessian, canvas and other similar fabrics fi xed to wall or 4 Shall be given in accordance with the foregoing
STANDARD METHOD OF MEASURING BUILDING WORK FOR AFRICA 2015 – FIRST EDITION PAGE 104
NOTE: External work of minor extent may be given in “Earthworks” under suitable headings
Item or work to be measured Unit Measurement rules Descrip(cid:415) ons shall be deemed Explanatory notes
1 Excava(cid:415) on, fi lling, digging up and removing topsoil, etc
shall be given in accordance with the principles laid
1 Topsoil and compost m3 2 Topsoil shall be given in accordance with the principles
3 Topsoil and compost to plant boxes shall be given
2 Lime and fer(cid:415) lizer kg 1 Spreading and mixing
5 Grassing, ground cover, herbaceous plants, etc m2 2 Watering, mowing, trimming
6 Trees, shrubs, bulbs and plants No 3 Excava(cid:415) on, plan(cid:415) ng, back-
7 Removing and reposi(cid:415) oning of exis(cid:415) ng trees No
STANDARD METHOD OF MEASURING BUILDING WORK FOR AFRICA 2015 – FIRST EDITION PAGE 105
Item or work to be measured Unit Measurement rules Descrip(cid:415) ons shall be deemed Explanatory notes
7 Pruning of exis(cid:415) ng trees and shrubs
8 Pruning of exis(cid:415) ng trees and shrubs No
10 Rockery boulders No 4 May be suitably grouped
11 Retaining structures formed of fi lled gabion boxes and 5 Shall be given in accordance with the principles laid
ma(cid:425) resses, concrete, precast concrete, interlocking down in the relevant trades
13 Paving etc 6 Shall be given in accordance with the principles laid
down in the relevant trades
15 Ponds, water features, etc formed of concrete, precast 7 Shall be given under suitable headings in accordance
concrete, masonry, etc with the principles laid down in the relevant trades
STANDARD METHOD OF MEASURING BUILDING WORK FOR AFRICA 2015 – FIRST EDITION PAGE 106
Item or work to be measured Unit Measurement rules Descrip(cid:415) ons shall be deemed Explanatory notes
17 Drainage 8 Shall be given in accordance with the principles laid
18 Irriga(cid:415) on systems 9 Shall be given in accordance with the principles laid
down in the relevant trades
19 Eff ect ligh(cid:415) ng 10 Shall be given in accordance with the principles laid
20 Excava(cid:415) ons and fi lling 11 Shall be given in accordance with the principles laid
21 Sub-base and base courses 12 Shall be given in accordance with the principles laid
22 Stabilisa(cid:415) on of layer works with lime, cement, etc
21 Compac(cid:415) on of natural or excavated ground surfaces
23 Compac(cid:415) on of natural or excavated ground surfaces m2 13 Shall be measured only when the method and/or degree
22 Road and parking surfacing
24 Road and parking surfacing of gravel, concrete, 14 No deduc(cid:415) ons shall be made for openings, wants, etc
STANDARD METHOD OF MEASURING BUILDING WORK FOR AFRICA 2015 – FIRST EDITION PAGE 107
Item or work to be measured Unit Measurement rules Descrip(cid:415) ons shall be deemed Explanatory notes
26 Channels, humps and shoulders formed in road surfacing m or 15 Shall be given as extra over
27 Channelling, kerbing, edging, etc of concrete, brick, 16 Circular channelling, kerbing or edging shall be given 5 Earthworks, formwork,
stone and the like m separately, dis(cid:415) nc(cid:415) on being made between work fi nishes, angles, ends, etc
exceeding and not exceeding 4m radius
28 Road signs, crash barriers, etc 17 Shall be given in accordance with the principles laid
down in the relevant trades
18 Paintwork shall be included in the descrip(cid:415) ons
29 Drainage 19 Shall be given in accordance with the principles laid
30 Painted lines, le(cid:425) ers, etc 20 Shall be given in accordance with the principles laid
31 Stormwater channels of concrete m 21 Descrip(cid:415) ons shall include earthworks, formwork and
32 Angles, intersec(cid:415) ons, ends, etc No 22 Shall be given together as extra over
STANDARD METHOD OF MEASURING BUILDING WORK FOR AFRICA 2015 – FIRST EDITION PAGE 108
Item or work to be measured Unit Measurement rules Descrip(cid:415) ons shall be deemed Explanatory notes
33 Fencing m 23 The height above ground level or other base shall be 6 Holes, binding wire, screws,
24 Descrip(cid:415) ons shall include site clearance and the prepara-
25 Descrip(cid:415) ons shall include bolts and straining eye bolts
26 Posts and stays which occur at regular intervals may be
included in the descrip(cid:415) ons or may be given separately
in number. Descrip(cid:415) ons shall include caps, base plates,
arms or brackets for overhang, poin(cid:415) ng and driving
27 Fencing to a curve shall be given separately sta(cid:415) ng
whether straight or circular between posts
28 If circular between posts the radius shall be stated
34 Posts and stays diff ering from those included in the 29 Shall be given separately as extra over
35 Gates No 30 Descrip(cid:415) ons shall include hinges, latches, stops, runners, 7 Holes, binding wire, screws,
30 Concrete bases and kerbs
36 Bases to posts and stays 31 Shall be included in the descrip(cid:415) ons or may be given in 8 Earthworks, formwork, etc
38 Washing lines No 32 Alterna(cid:415) vely washing lines may be given in detail in
accordance with the foregoing principles
STANDARD METHOD OF MEASURING BUILDING WORK FOR AFRICA 2015 – FIRST EDITION PAGE 109
Item or work to be measured Unit Measurement rules Descrip(cid:415) ons shall be deemed Explanatory notes
39 Pain(cid:415) ng fencing, washing lines, etc 33 Pain(cid:415) ng shall be included in the descrip(cid:415) ons
34 Alterna(cid:415) vely pain(cid:415) ng may be given separately in
accordance with the principles laid down in “Paintwork”
STANDARD METHOD OF MEASURING BUILDING WORK FOR AFRICA 2015 – FIRST EDITION PAGE 110
STANDARD METHOD OF MEASURING BUILDING WORK FOR AFRICA 2015 – FIRST EDITION PAGE 111
STANDARD METHOD OF MEASURING BUILDING WORK FOR AFRICA 2015 – FIRST EDITION PAGE 112
STANDARD METHOD OF MEASURING BUILDING WORK FOR AFRICA 2015 – FIRST EDITION PAGE 113
STANDARD METHOD OF MEASURING BUILDING WORK FOR AFRICA 2015 – FIRST EDITION PAGE 114
STANDARD METHOD OF MEASURING BUILDING WORK FOR AFRICA 2015 – FIRST EDITION PAGE 115
STANDARD METHOD OF MEASURING BUILDING WORK FOR AFRICA 2015 – FIRST EDITION PAGE 116
STANDARD METHOD OF MEASURING BUILDING WORK FOR AFRICA 2015 – FIRST EDITION PAGE 117
STANDARD METHOD OF MEASURING BUILDING WORK FOR AFRICA 2015 – FIRST EDITION PAGE 118
PO Box 3527 I Halfway House 1685 I Building 27 I Suite G6 I Thornhill Offi ce Park I Bekker Road I Midrand 1686 BUILDING WORK FOR AFRICA 2015
PROPOSED TOWN HOUSES ON PLOT 5144 BLOCK 101 KYAGGWE
BILL NO. DESCRIPTION PAGE AMOUNT (USHS)
Signature of Employer Signature of the Contractor
GENERAL CONDITIONS AND PRELIMINARIES
The Contractor shall be responsible for the provision of all plant, tools and
vehicles and workmen required for the works except insofar as may be stated
otherwise herein or except for such items specifically and only required for the
use of and provided by Nominated Sub-Contractors as described herein.
No timber used for scaffolding, formwork or similar purpose shall be used
Safety, Health and Welfare of Work People
The Contractor shall be responsible for andshall ensure the safety and welfare of
his work people, and those of his Sub-Contractors, Nominated Sub-Contractors,
Nominated Suppliers and persons employed directly by the Employer. Allow for 500,000
providing and maintaining on the site adequate medical facilities and approved
first aid equipment kept fully replenished and in an accessible position.
The Contractor shall give all notices in accordance with Clause 4 of the
The Contractor shall pay all fees and charges required under Clause 4 of the
Conditions of Contract. The amount of all such fees and charge shall be deemed
to be included in the contract Sum. Those in respect of the following items are
included elsewhere in this Document if applicable to the works.
- Temporary telephones and computer
- water for the works
- works to be carried out by Local Authorities or Statutory Undertakings
Before commencing work, the Contractor must arrange for and agree with the
Architect and Quantity Surveyor the existing slab levels and internal dimensions
The levels thus agreed will then be used for the duration of the works for all
GENERAL CONDITIONS AND PRELIMINARIES 1/1
Setting out the works
The Contractor shall set out the works in accordance with the dimensions and
levels shown on the Drawings and shall be responsible for theircorrectness ofall
dimensions and levels so set out by him and will be required to amend all errors
arising from inaccurate setting out at his own cost and arising from inaccurate
setting out at his own cost and expense. In the event of any error or discrepancy
in the dimensions or levels marked on the Drawings being discovered such
errors or discrepancies must be reported by the Contractor to the Architect for
No work shall be commenced by the Contractor until he has received written
instructions from the Architect to adjust such discrepancies which may be
proved. Upon receipt of such instructions the Contractor shall thereupon be
responsible for the accurate setting out of the works, giving effect to the
adjustments necessary to comply with such instructions, and no claim for extra
expense of relief from the provision of Clause 5 of the Conditions of Contract
based on any discrepancy or error in the dimensions or levels shown on the
The Contractor shall be responsible for checking all schedules and drawings
supplied by the Architect and all shop drawings approved by the Architect. In
the event of any discrepancy being found between such schedules and drawings
or if the Contractor considers that additional detail drawings or if the Contractor
considers that additional detail drawings are required, then in either case the
Contractor shall report such discrepancy to the Architect for instruction or apply
in writing for such detail at least 28 days before the works concerned are to be
The Contractor shall ascertain from the drawings or otherwise any holes,
recesses, plugs, etc. which may be required in time to form these as the works
proceed. No extra payment will be allowed for cutting or forming such holes,
GENERAL CONDITIONS AND PRELIMINARIES 1/2
The Contractor shall provide full and adequate supervision during the progress
of the works and shall keep a competent and authorised Site Agent and General
Foreman, approved by the Architect (which approval may be withdrawn at any
The Site Agent and General Foremen shall give their whole time to the
supervision of the works and must be able to receive and act upon (on behalf of
the Contractor)all instructions, directionsorordersissued by the Architect orhis
No work shall be carried out on gazetted holidays unless authorised by the
Labour and fair wages
The Contractorshall provide all labour andshall include for all costs arising from
the current Government regulations regarding annual leave and passages,
medical facilities, public holidays, overtime, income tax, housing, travelling
allowance, wages and salaries, and any other statutory requirement current at the
The Contractor shall pay rates of wages and observe hours and conditions of
labour not less favourable than the minimum rates of remuneration and
The contractor shall ensure no minors (persons aged below 18 years) are
employed to undertake any works related to the project.
He shall also ensure all persons employed on site have identity cards bearing
The Contractor shall provide all watching and lighting and everything else
necessary by day and night for the due protection and security of the works and 3,000,000
the public and other persons.
He shall provide all barriers, notices, watchmen to prevent access of
unauthorised persons into the site.
The Contractor will be liable on all consequences of theft from the site of his
own or Sub Contractors or Suppliers materials or equipment. Any such theft will
not relieve the Contractor of his liability for completion on time.
GENERAL CONDITIONS AND PRELIMINARIES 1/3
Samples of proposed materials and workmanship shall, if required by the
Architect,be submitted forapproval, andthose samples will be left onsite by the
Architect who shall have power to reject all such materials and condemn such
workmanship that does not correspond with the approved samples.
The Architect may, whenever he considers it desirable, test any materials before
they leave the maker's premises as well as after delivery on the site, and the
Architect shall be at liberty to reject any materials after delivery should he
consider them unsatisfactory, notwithstanding the preliminary test and approval
of the materials at the maker's premises. The costs of these tests are to be borne
The Contractor shall, whenever so instructed by the Architect, cut out sections
of work executed or samples of materials incorporated therein and shall deliver 1,000,000
them where directed for the purpose of testing.
The contractor shall ensure curing of works is undertaken regularly at least three
times a day during dry weather.
Working during odd hours
The Contractor shall allow for working during odd hours he considers will be
necessary in order to complete the work by the contract Date for Completion.
Housing labour on the site
The contractor may only house a minimal number of his staff on site with
written permission from the Architect.
Area to be occupied by the Contractor
The area of the Site which may be occupied by the Contractor for use as storage
and for the purpose of erecting workshops, etc., shall be agreed between the
The Contractor's attention is drawn to Government legislation which requires
payment by the Contractor of the Value Added Tax on all contracts and his
tender must include for such costs. Provision is made on the Main Summary for
GENERAL CONDITIONS AND PRELIMINARIES 1/4
GENERAL CONDITIONS AND PRELIMINARIES
Clearing away temporary works and making good after shall be deemed to be
The Contractor shall provide all temporary roads, tracks,hard standings,crossing
and the like (to the approval of the Engineer and generally only over the areas
planned for permanent roads or hardstandings) to ensure satisfactory and 5,000,000
efficient access to the works. The cost of such temporary works shall be deemed
All such temporary roads shall be to the approval of the Architect and in general
will only permitted over the areas planned for permanent roads and
hardstandings as indicated on the site plan.
All such temporary roads shall be to the approval of the Architect and in general
will only permitted over the areas planned for permanent roads and
hardstandings as indicated on the site plan.
Temporary Buildings for use by the Contractor
The Contractor shall, locate his site huts where directed by the Architect on site.
He shall be responsible for the maintenance of the same including pulling them
down, removing from the site and leaving the place clean after the end of the
contract to the satisfaction of the Architect.
Temporary toilets which discharge into conservation tanks shall be provided,
maintained and removed on completion by the Contractor in a form and to the
satisfaction of the Architect and Local Authorities. No latrines or facilities which
discharge soil waste into the ground will be permitted. The conservation tanks
shall be emptied at frequent intervals and maintained in a clean and hygienic
Temporary facilities for use by persons acting on behalf of the Employer
The Contractor shall also provide, for use by the Consultants, a table and chairs
of sufficient size and number of site meetings, a plan chest and pin-up boards.
The Contractor shall also supply cleaning and attendance on the above-
Copies of the Drawings, Specification and Bills of Quantities shall be kept in this
GENERAL CONDITIONS AND PRELIMINARIES 1/5
Water for the Works
The Contractor shall be responsible for providing clean water for the works
including installing the pipework, metres and temporary storage tanks. Upon
Practical Completion, the Contractor shall remove all tanks, metres, etc. and
clean the place to the satisfaction of the Architect.
The Contract Sum shall be deemed to include for all fees and charges for the
Temporary Lighting and Power for the Works
The Contractor shall provide all artificial lighting, electric power and other
energy required for the execution of the work. The provision of light and, where
appropriate, power for Nominated Sub-Contractors, Authorities and Boards is 500,000
included in the items of general and special attendance in Provisional and P C
The Contract Sum shall be deemed to include for all fees and charges for all
temporary services and clearing away on completion, and for the cost of all
current consumed for the works.
The contractor’s attention is drawn to the fact that the power supply may not be
reliable and should make arrangements for alternative sources of power to avoid
The Contractor shall arrange for the foreman on site to have a mobile phone in
orderthathe may be contacted atany time and shall pay all charges andexpenses
The Contractor shall unless otherwise directed, obtain any necessary consent or
licence from the Local Authority and immediately upon commencement of the
works the Contractor shall, in accordance with the details supplied by the
Architect, make and erect a Sign-board showing the name of the Employer, all
the consultants and such other information as shall be directed and approved by
Provide all scaffolding, (timber ), that may be required for the works.
The use of standing scaffolding by Nominated Sub-Contractors and the
provision of special scaffolding for them are included in the items of general 300,000
GENERAL CONDITIONS AND PRELIMINARIES 1/6
WORK BY PUBLIC BODIES OR NOMINATED SUB-
CONTRACTORS OR GOODS AND MATERIALS FROM
The words "Prime Cost" (or the initials "P.C.") shall mean net cost exclusive of
any trade, cash or other discount whatsoever but inclusive of the cost ofpacking,
carriage and delivery. Such cost shall be the sums due to the Sub-Contractor or
Supplier after adjustment where applicable in respect of measurements or rates.
Any increases or decreases in these Prime Cost sums resulting from adjustments
and properly paid by the Contractor, shall be added to or deducted from the
contract Sum in the final account. In substantiation the Contractor will be
required to produce to the Quantity Surveyor all quotations, invoices and
receipted accounts as shall be necessary to show the details of the sums actually
Any sum added by the Contractor in these Bills of Quantities in respect of profit
upon any Prime Cost sum will be adjusted to bear the same proportion to the
The Contractor shall be responsible for supplying all Nominated Sub-
Contractors with sufficient information to enable them to prepare their schemes
andworking drawings, (ifany), andshall alsobe responsible forensuring that any
work carried out by him in connection with sub-contracted work shall conform
with this information including such dimensions as may be agreed with
The Contractor shall place all orders with Nominated Sub-Contractors clearly on
his own behalf and shall not pledge the credit of the Employer either directly or
indirectly. In no case shall the Contractor be deemed to be the agent of the
Employer nor shall there be created any privity of contract as between the 1,000,000
Employer and the Nominated Sub-Contractor. The Contractor must enter into a
written Sub-contract using an approved form and must deposit with the
Nominated Sub-Contractors shall be responsible for:-
(a) The cost of any necessary alteration to or re-erection of the Contractor's
ordinary scaffolding which may be required by them to carry out their work.
(c) Provision of all necessary labour plant, tools, materials and equipment, etc.,
necessary to carry out and complete their work.
GENERAL CONDITIONS AND PRELIMINARIES 1/7
GENERAL CONDITIONS AND PRELIMINARIES
PROTECTION AND CLEANING THE WORKS
The Contractor shall allow for providing and/or maintaining all shoring,
strutting, needling and other supports and shall take all other precautions and
adopt such expedients as may be necessary to preserve the stability of all
buildings, structures, fences, walls, land and property, roads and footpaths,
sewers, drains, gullies and other services (including those of adjoining owners)
that may in any way be affected by the works immediately he has taken
possession of the Site and until completion of the works.
Any damage and/or settlement is to be made good by the Contractor at his own
expense to the satisfaction of the Architect and all other parties concerned.
The Contractor shall cover up and protect all finished work liable to damage
including provision of temporary roofs, gutters, drains, etc., until the completion
The entire responsibility in respect of all matters mentioned or referred to in this
clause shall rest with the Contractor not withstanding any approval given by the
Architect to, or concurrence in, the action taken or proposed to be taken by the
The contractor shall ensure the site is clean at all times.
He shall, upon completion of the works remove all temporary buildings, plant,
rubbish and unused material, and shall leave the whole of the Site of the works in
a clean and tidy state to the satisfaction of the Architect. He shall also remove all
rubbish and dirt from the Site at weekly intervals or as directed by the Project
Before handing over any building the Contractor shall properly clean the floors
and finished surfaces, clean glass inside and outside and leave all sanitary and
other appliances in full working order. He shall also clean down external steps,
and paths or access ways used by him, and leave the whole in perfect condition
GENERAL CONDITIONS AND PRELIMINARIES 1/8
Item Description Page No. Amount (USHS.)
TOTAL FOR BILL No. 2 FOR ONE HOUSE
Item Description Unit Qty Rate Amount
Clear site of bushes, shrubs, and the like including
grubbing up roots and remove materials from site
Excavate top loose soil 150mm deep and dispose
Excavate to reduce levels not exceeding 150 mm
Excavate foundation trench not exceeding 1.50
Excavate pad footing not exceeding 1.50 metres
Load and cart away surplus excavated material
Return, fill and ram selected excavated material
Allow for planking and strutting to uphold and
Allow for disposal of water from foundation by
J pumping, bailing or otherwise to keep excavations ITEM 1 500,000 500,000
Treat surfaces of hardcore and bottom and sides
equal and approved antitermite solution.
1000 gauge slip membrane polythene sheeting laid
Item Description Unit Qty Rate Amount
and fixing and including all necessary tying
wire and spacing blocks
HIGH YIELD STEEL ROUND BARS TO
Item Description Unit Qty Rate Amount
Solid Concrete blockwork bedded and jointed
in cement sand (1:4) mortar as described :
with and including: 20 SWG Hoop Iron wall
tie 25mm wide x 450mm long cast 75mm into
concrete and built into joint of blockwalling:
TWO COATS EXTERNAL CEMENT
RENDER (1:4) finished with wood float
TWO COATS BLACK BITUMASTIC paint
150mm thick approved imported murram
200mm thick bed of imported hardcore filling well
Item Description Unit Qty Rate Amount
Item Description Unit Qty Rate Amount
200 mm thick composite hollow Kajjansi clay
including 150 mm wide concrete ribs and 50 mm
bands of concrete within the suspended slab with
vibrated Concrete Class 25 : A142 BRC weighing
2.22 kg per square meter with 300mm minimum
Item Description Unit Qty Rate Amount
and fixing and including all necessary tying
wire and spacing blocks
HIGH YIELD STEEL ROUND BARS TO
Item Description Unit Qty Rate Amount
Item Description Unit Qty Rate Amount
PRECAST CONCRETE CLASS 20; finished
fair on all exposed surfaces including bedding
and jointing in cement sand (1:3) mortar
350mm x 75mm Weathered and throated window
cill on and including softwood packing piece;
precast concrete class 20: finished fair on all
exposed surfaces including bedding and jointing in
cement sand (1:3) mortar:to Architect's detailed
Solid Concrete blockwork (7/Nmm2) jointed
and pointed in cement sand (1:3) mortar as
described : with and including: 20 SWG Hoop
Iron wall tie 25mm wide x 450mm long cast
75mm into concrete and built into joint of
DAMP PROOF COURSE OF BITUMEN
FELT TO B.S 743 Type A with 150mm laps
including cement and sand (1:3 levelling bed
Item Description Unit Qty Rate Amount
and fixing and including all necessary tying
wire and spacing blocks
Item Description Unit Qty Rate Amount
45mm THICK SOLID CORED DOORS
faced both sides with internal quality plywood
mahogany veneered for polishing and
complete with all necessary accessories and
approved door hardware set, iron mongery
Timber skeleton swing door (D-02); 900mm x
Timber panelled swing door (D-03); 900mm x
Timber Panelled swing door (D-04); 900mm x
WROT MAHOGANY FRAMES AND
TRANSOMS selected, treated and kept clean;
Item Description Unit Qty Rate Amount
SUPPLY AND FIX the following
ironmongery : locks and furniture where
applicable are to be equal to those
Euro cylinder lock case: 45mm backset and double
turn key stainless steel handle: Ref LS-C85-306 AB
Union SS 100 x 75 mm ball bearing brushed heavy
duty mild steel hinges
Antique brass oval shaped floor mounted door
PREPARE AND APPLY TWO courses of
sand sealer, 3 coats of timber vanish to all
faces and panels in accordance with
PURPOSE MADE STEEL DOOR : Standard
Steel door; complete with and INCLUDING
ACCESSORIES (Double turn key stainless
steel handle, stop latches, pest mesh leaf); 2
courses of undercoat, 3 coats of metal paint to
all faces and panels;with folding burglar
Item Description Unit Qty Rate Amount
2700 x 2400 mm high overall steel double leaf
vent above; with 5mm glass panes, linseed putty.
1500 x 2400 mm high overall steel single swing
Item Description Unit Qty Rate Amount
POWDER COATED STEEL FRAMES AND
putty; iron mongery and accessories (mild
steel heavy duty hinges, swivel latches,
window stays, pest mesh in vents); with
PREPARE SURFACE AND APPLY 2 courses
of undercoat, 3 coats of metal paint to all faces
Item Description Unit Qty Rate Amount
Terrazzo on Front and Back Porch
32mm Terrazzo n two coats with white cement
smooth finish : including plastic division strips.
Prepare and apply two coats "Johnson Carefree"
CEMENT AND WASHED SAND (1:3)
25mm Thick two coat work to concrete and
Extra over render to mouldings around openings
Item Description Unit Qty Rate Amount
SUPPLY AND APPLY: two coats of plaster
primer, and 3 coats of first grade paint:
applied according to Manufacturer's written
CEMENT SAND (1:4) SCREED finished
SUPPLY AND FIX; APPROVED NON-SLIP
PORCELAIN FLOOR TILES: bedded and
jointed in approved adhesive: as per the
SUPPLY AND FIX; APPROVED NON SLIP
CERAMIC FLOOR TILES: bedded and
jointed in approved adhesive : pointed with
approved coloured cement : as per Architect's
Item Description Unit Qty Rate Amount
INTERNAL LIME PLASTER, FIRST COAT
of cement lime and sand (1:2:9) second coatof
cement, lime putty and sand (1:1:6) steel
PREPARE AND APPLY THREE COATS
first grade ceiling matt emulsion paint
CEMENT AND SAND (1:4) SCREED
FINISHED to receive wall tiles
INTERNAL LIME PLASTER first coat of
cement lime and sand (1:3:9) second coat of
cement, lime putty and sand (1:1:6) Steel
SUPPLY AND FIX: Ceramic wall tiles and
bedding and pointing on screed (M.S) and
pointing in coloured cement : as per
Item Description Unit Qty Rate Amount
PREPARE AND APPLY ONE MIST COAT
AND THREE COATS of first grade silk vinyl
emulsion paint internally on: in accordance
CEMENT AND SAND (1:4) SCREEDS :
finished to receive floor tiles
SUPPLY AND FIX APPROVED NON SLIP
PORCELAIN FLOOR TILES: bedded and
jointed in approved adhesive : pointed with
approved coloured cement : as per Architect's
Item Description Unit Qty Rate Amount
PREPARE SURFACE AND APPLY
PRIMER, apply one coat of red oxide primer,
one undercoat and two finishing coats of oil
Item Description Unit Qty Rate Amount
Item Description Page No. Amount (USHS.)
TOTAL FOR BILL No. 3 FOR ONE HOUSE
Item Description Unit Qty Rate Amount
and fixing and including all necessary tying wire
HIGH YIELD STEEL ROUND BARS TO BS
Item Description Unit Qty Rate Amount
PRECAST CONCRETE CLASS 20; finished fair
on all exposed surfaces including bedding and
jointing in cement sand (1:3) mortar
350mm x 75mm Weathered and throated window cill
on and including softwood packing piece; precast
including bedding and jointing in cement sand (1:3)
Solid Concrete blockwork (7/Nmm2) jointed and
pointed in cement sand (1:4) mortar as described
: with and including: 20 SWG Hoop Iron wall tie
25mm wide x 450mm long cast 75mm into
concrete and built into joint of blockwalling:
Item Description Unit Qty Rate Amount
3.3 ROOF AND RAIN WATER GOODS
Item Description Unit Qty Rate Amount
45mm THICK SOLID CORED DOORS faced
both sides with internal quality plywood
mahogany veneered for polishing and hardwood,
concealed lipping all round, complete with all
necessary accessories and approved door
(measured separately as per Architect's drawings
Timber skeleton swing door (D-03); 900mm x
Timber panelled swing door (D-04); 900mm x
WROT MAHOGANY FRAMES AND
TRANSOMS selected, treated and kept clean; to
Item Description Unit Qty Rate Amount
SUPPLY AND FIX the following ironmongery :
locks and furniture where applicable are to be
equal to those manufactured by "UNION" and
Euro cylinder lock case: 45mm backset and double
A through deadbolt complete with elegant double turn NO. 7 2 50,000 1 ,750,000
key stainless steel handle: Ref LS-C85-306 AB
Union SS 100 x 75 mm ball bearing brushed heavy
duty mild steel hinges
Antique brass oval shaped floor mounted door
PREPARE AND APPLY TWO courses of sand
sealer, 3 coats of timber vanish to all faces and
panels in accordance with manufacturer's
PURPOSE MADE STEEL DOOR : Standard
Steel door; complete with and INCLUDING ALL
(Double turn key stainless steel handle, stop
coats of metal paint to all faces and panels;with
2700 x 2400 mm high overall steel double leaf sliding
Item Description Unit Qty Rate Amount
Item Description Unit Qty Rate Amount
POWDER COATED STEEL FRAMES AND
putty; iron mongery and accessories (mild steel
heavy duty hinges, swivel latches, window stays,
pest mesh in vents); with burglar proofing; as per
PREPARE SURFACE AND APPLY 2 courses of
undercoat, 3 coats of metal paint to all faces and
Item Description Unit Qty Rate Amount
CEMENT AND WASHED SAND (1:3) render
25mm Thick two coat work to concrete and masonary
Extra over render to mouldings around openings of
250mm average girth and 50 mm average thickness
SUPPLY AND APPLY: two coats of plaster
primer, and 3 coats of first grade paint: applied
Item Description Unit Qty Rate Amount
CEMENT SAND (1:4) SCREED finished
SUPPLY AND FIX; APPROVED NON-SLIP
PORCELAIN FLOOR TILES: bedded and
jointed in approved adhesive: as per the
SUPPLY AND FIX; APPROVED NON SLIP
CERAMIC FLOOR TILES: bedded and jointed
in approved adhesive : pointed with approved
coloured cement : as per Architect's detailed
INTERNAL LIME PLASTER, FIRST COAT of
cement lime and sand (1:2:9) second coat of
cement, lime putty and sand (1:1:6) steel
12mm th. two coat work to concrete and masonary
PREPARE AND APPLY THREE COATS first
grade ceiling matt emulsion paint
Item Description Unit Qty Rate Amount
CEMENT AND SAND (1:4) SCREED
FINISHED to receive wall tiles
INTERNAL LIME PLASTER first coat of
cement lime and sand (1:3:9) second coat of
cement, lime putty and sand (1:1:6) Steel
SUPPLY AND FIX: Ceramic wall tiles and
bedding and pointing on screed (M.S) and
pointing in coloured cement : as per Architect's
PREPARE AND APPLY ONE MIST COAT
AND THREE COATS of first grade silk vinyl
emulsion paint internally on: in accordance with
Item Description Unit Qty Rate Amount
Item Description Unit Qty Rate Amount
Item Description Page No. Amount (USHS.)
TOTAL FOR BILL No. 5 FOR ONE HOUSE
Item Description Unit Qty Rate Amount
Load and cart away surplus excavated materials from
Compaction of ground surfaces under paving,
including scarifying for a depth of 150mm, breaking
C down oversize material, adding suitable material where SM 1 12 1 5,000 1,680,000
necessary and compacting to 95% Mod AASHTO
200mm stabilized marrum sub-base : well rolled and
bed; compacting with approved vibrator; filling joints
Precast concrete grade 25 kerbs ; vibrated; Size 150 x
250mm high; splayed one face; part fair finish all
exposed surfaces; bedded, jointed and pointed in
cement mortar (1:3); laid on and including plain insitu
deep and 100mm wide haunching both sides; including
all necessary formwork, excavations and earthworks; all
Prepare and apply three coats of road marking
Prepare surface slurry seal tack coat and paint 100mm
Item Description Unit Qty Rate Amount
Allow for labour and material for construction of
boundary walling 1900mm high overall above
existing ground level comprising 200mm thick
solid concrete block walls with 300 x 75mm thick
weathered and throated coping; 600mm high
(minimum below ground level) 200mm thick solid
concrete block sub-walling , rendered and
pronounced recessed square keys with and
including 600 x 200mm reinforced concrete class 20
strip footing : 300 x 300mm thick reinforced
concrete columns at 4000mm centres with 136mm
thick weathered and throated coping, 700 mm high
spray painted metal grille comprising of 3 No, 50 x
mm AHA vertical spiked members at 150 mm
centers, with steel burglar proofing with black
Item Description Unit Qty Rate Amount
Steel fabricated double swing gate in two equal leaves
3mm SHS framing all round and with 25 x 25 x 3mm
RHS vertical bars at 100 mm centres, steel gate post
cast into reinforced concrete column; size 450 x 450
mm, including concrete foundation and all locking and
opening devices, complete with red oxide primer and
three coats of black gloss oil paint to Client's approval.
Non electrified security razor wire, gauge 24, diameter
Item Description Unit Qty Rate Amount
Construct 1 No. Guard House approximate floor area
12 square metres comprising 200mm thick solid
concrete block wall on plain concrete class 15/20mm
thick plain concrete class 15/20mm floor slab, 200mm
thick plastered and painted solid concrete block walls,
IT4 roof sheets on steel roof structure 1 No. timber
wiring and fittings, non-slip porcelain floor tiles floor
paving, plastered and painted expamet ceiling all
Item Description Unit Qty Rate Amount
Excavate to a fine tilth, plant approved grass species on
Plant royal palm trees on imported manure (M.S) water
and maintain till fully established
Item Description Unit Qty Rate Amount
PROPOSED TOWN HOUSES ON PLOT 5144 BLOCK 101 KYAGGWE MUKONO
PRELIMINARIES AND CONDITIONS OF CONTRACT
General Conditions and Preliminaries 20,000,000